UDÂNAVARGA.
(In the Language of India, "Uddânavarga;" in the Language of Tibet, "Tched-du brjod pai tsoms.") Book I
I. IMPERMANENCY. Glory be to Him who knows all! Let there be happiness!
1. The Victorious one spoke these verses (udâna); Hearken unto me while I tell them; what I say is to dispel sleep and torpor, and to bring gladness to the mind.
2. The All-wise, the Protector, the Mighty one, the Very compassionate one, He who had finished with corporeal existence: Bhagavat; spoke (or has spoken) thus:
3. Alas! the impermanency of created things (samkâra); what is created is subject to decay. As what has been born must come to destruction, happy they who are at rest! l
4 (146). To one who is being burnt: what joy can there be, what subject of rejoicing Ye who dwell in the midst of darkness, why seek ye not a light?
5 (149). Those pigeon-coloured bones are thrown away and scattered in every direction; what pleasure is there in looking at them?
6. One who has heretofore been subject to the misery of birth from the womb may go to the highest place and come no more back again (into the world).
7. One sees many men in the forenoon, some of whom one will not see in the afternoon; one sees many men in the afternoon, some of whom one will not see in the (next) forenoon.
8. Many men and women do die even in their prime; though men then be called young, what reliance can they place in life?
9. Some die in the womb, some die at the birth: some gradually decay, some pass away in the vigour of their manhood.
10. Some are old, and some are young, some are grown up; by degrees they all do disappear, like ripe fruit falling.
11. As the ripe fruit is always filled with the dread of falling, so likewise he who has been born is filled with the fear of death.
12. It is with the life of mortal man as with the shining vases made from clay by the potter-they all finish by being destroyed.
13 (347). It is with the life of mortal man as with the spider, who, stretching hither and thither its web, is enclosed in it.
14. I t is with the life of mortal man as with (the spider), who, though it would free itself from its trap, finds, whichever way it takes a step, the abode of death before it?
15. As a river that is always running swiftly by and never returns are the days of man’s life-they depart and come back no more.
16. Joy is fleeting and mixed with pain; it swiftly disappears, like figures traced on water with a wand.
17 (135). As a cowherd with his staff gathers his cattle into the stable, so disease and old age bring mankind to the lord of death.
18. As the waters of a brook, so flow on by day and night the hours of man’s life; it draws nearer and nearer to its end.
19 (60). Long is the night to him who is watching, great the distance to him who is way worn, and great the circle of transmigration to the fools who know not the holy Law.
20. These children are mine, these riches are mine; " with these (thoughts) is the fool disturbed. What are children and riches to one who (owns) not even himself in the other world?
21. It is the law of humanity that, though one acquires hundreds and thousands of worldly goods, one still falls into the power of the lord of death.
22. The end of all that has been hoarded up is to be spent; the end of what has been lifted up is to be cast down; the end of meeting is separation; the end of life is death.
23. As the end of life is death, and all creatures do die, so likewise do virtue and vice bear fruits which follow after the deeds.
24 (126). They who do evil go to hell; 1 they who are virtuous go to happiness; they who have observed the right way and are without sin obtain nirvāṇa.
25. The Buddhas, the pratyeka Buddhas, and the disciples of the Buddhas cast off this body; what is the use of speaking of the ignorant crowd?
26. There is no place where is not the pain of death, not in the sky nor in the midst of the sea, not even if one enters into the clefts of the mountains.
27. All who have been and all who shall be, abandon this body and depart; the wise man who understands that (the body) is to be dreaded, lives a life of purity according to the Law.
28. Seeing old age, the pain of disease, and the death of the heedless, he who is earnest gives up a home that is like a prison; 6 but how can the common of mortals cast off desires?
29 (151). Even the brilliant chariot of the king is destroyed, the body also draws nigh to old age; but the best of men: who teaches others this best of all good laws, shall not know old age.
30. Thou art foolish and despicable? and doest not that which is right; for that body (rūpa) in which thou delights will be the cause of thy ruin.
31. One may live a hundred years, yet he is subject to the lord of death; one may reach old age, or else he is carried off by disease.
32. He who is (always) changing without ceasing, decaying day and night, filled with the anguish of birth and death, is like the fish thrown in hot water.
33. This life is fleeting away day and night; it is unstable like the stream of a great river; one goes on not to return again?
34. Man is like a fish in a shallow pool of water; day and night this life is passing away; what subject of rejoicing is there in so brief a thing?
35 (148). The end of life is death; this body bent down by age, this receptacle of disease, is rapidly wasting away; this mass of corruption will soon be destroyed.
36 (41). Alas! this body will soon lie on the earth unnoticed, empty: senseless, thrown away in a cemetery like a billet of wood.
37. Continually afflicted by disease, always emitting some impurity, this body, undermined by age and death, what is the use of it?
----------
38 (286). " This (abode) will do for winter and (this) for summer;" thus ponders the rapidly decaying fool who has not seen the danger.
39 (288). Thou who art surrounded by children and flocks, children are no refuge, nor are father, mother, and kinsfolk; thou art without a refuge!
40. " Such and such actions are a source of felicity, which I, having performed them, will acquire." He who prepares himself in this manner will overcome age, disease, and death.
41. Give yourselves up then to the unceasing joy of meditation (sambodhi); see the end of birth and age in the birth of diligence; overcome the hosts of Mâra and the Bhixus shall pass beyond birth and death.
Chapter on Impermanency, the First.
II. DESIRE (KÂMA).
1. ALL indecision produces desires; it is called the root of desire; suppress indecision and (desire) will arise in thee no more.
2 (215).From desires comes grief, from desires comes fear; he who is free from desires knows neither grief nor fear.
3 (214). From pleasures comes grief, from pleasures comes fear; he who is free from pleasures knows neither grief nor fear.
4. The fruit of desires and pleasures ripens into sorrow; their at first agreeable fruit is burning, as the torch that has not been cast away does finally burn the fooL3
5. Look at those who are fondly attached to jewels, earrings, to their children (those are fetters); but iron, wood, and rope make not strong fetters, says the Blessed One.
6 (346). It is hard for one who is held by the fetters of desire to free himself of them, says the Blessed One. The steadfast, who care not for the happiness of desires, cast them off, and do soon depart (to nirvâṇa).
7. There is no being in the world who is not through his indecision affected by desires, yet they who are steadfast seek to free themselves of desires, though they do pervade the word.
8. Mankind has no lasting desires; they are impermanent in them who experience them: free yourselves then from what cannot last, and abide not in the sojourn of death.
9. The sinless and reflective mind in which a desire arises experiences no misery from it; the different desires disturb it not: he who (has such a mind) is beyond death, I declare.
10 (239). As the smith does with the silver, so does the intelligent man, gradually and little by little, cleanse himself of all his impurities.
11. As the shoemaker, when he has well prepared his leather, can use it to make shoes, so when one has cast off desires, he has the highest happiness.
12. If one longs for happiness, let him cast off all desires; he who has cast off all desires will find the most perfect happiness.
13. As long as one follows after desire, one finds no satisfaction ; they who through wisdom have given it up find contentment.
14. Desires are never satiated; wisdom affords contentment : he who has the contentment of wisdom cannot fall into the power of lust.
15. They who have fondness for pleasure, and who delight only in what is wrong: would not perceive the danger they run, even if their life were drawing to a close.
16. The evil-minded is subdued by wealth and seeks not after the other world; his mind is subverted by his fondness for desires; he brings destruction on himself and on others.
17 (186). Even a shower of Karqçapanas would not satisfy the covetous; the wise know full well that desires bring little contentment and (much) pain.
18 (187). Not even in the pleasures of the gods does the disciple of the perfect Buddha find pleasure; he rejoices only in the destruction of desires.
19. Even a mountain of riches like unto Himavat would not suffice for the wealth of a single man; he who has understanding knows this full well.
20. They who know that this (i.e., desire) is the origin of sorrow, how can they delight in pleasures? Having learnt that this is the cause of pain in the world, they acquire steadfastness to help to control themselves.
Chapter on Desire, the Second.
III. LUST (TRICHNÂ)
1. Mankind is subdued by its indecision; he who considers evil passions as pure, increases and multiplies his passions and adds to the strength of his bonds.
2. He who continually keeps present in his mind that the quieting of indecision is peace, and that it is not agreeable, frees himself from all lust and destroys his bonds.
3. Desires envelop one as it were in darkness; one is torn to pieces by delighting in lust; the heedless are held fast by their bonds, as are fish to their watery homes. 4 (284). Beings who give themselves up to their heedlessness, their lustfulness increases as does a creeper; they run after old age and death as does the calf after its mother when longing for milk.
5 (334). He whose mind is impure and who is passionate, and who seeks after happiness, runs hither and thither in the orb (of birth), like the monkey in the forest seeking for fruit.
6 (342). Continually longing for happiness and walking in the way of birth and death, mankind is led on by its passions, and runs about like a hare in a net.
7. They who are held in the folds of lustfulness, who care only for what concerns existence (lit. existence and not existence), the fools delighting only in the enjoyments of attachment (yoga) will find suffering again and again.
8. Beings who are without righteousness (correct religious views) and peace of mind, who have all the attachments of Mars (sinful attachments), run after old age and death as does the calf after its mother when longing for milk.
9. He who casts off lust and the like, who is without affection for what is or is not existence, the Bhixu? has conquered existence and will attain the perfect and unsurpassable nirvâṇa.
10 (335). He who has cast off the world, which is hard to do, must become insensible to love for women (or women’s love), for it increases sorrow as does a shower the (birana) grass.
11 (336). He who has cast off the world, which is hard to do, and has become insensible to love for women, sorrow falls from off him as does the water drop from theotus.
12 (337, 1st part). Therefore as many as are here come together; this salutary word I tell unto you: Pull up the weed of lust by the root as one does the (birana) grass for the sake of the uçira (root).
13 (337, 2nd part). They who are given to the company of lustfulness wander about for a long time; so pull up lust by the root, and sorrow and fear are no more. 14 (341). Again and again seeking for it (existence), they again and again enter the womb; beings come and go; to one state of being succeeds another.
15. It is hard to cast off (existence) in this world; he who has cast off lust, who has pulled up the seed (of existence), will no more be subject to transmigration, for he has put an end to lust.
16. Care not about abiding in the conditions of humanity, which hold one captive among gods and men, but cross over from the regions of lust. If one is born in hell, the human condition (dal-hbyor) is at an end, and one repents him (of his mistake).
17 (340). The channels of lust are the source (of transmigration). Lust in (this) world is the root of the vine, which creeps up and entwines one as in the folds of a net. If one does not destroy this tormentor, he will be subject to ever-recurring suffering, and will never leave it entirely behind.
18 (338). As long as a live tree has not been pulled up by the roots, but only cut down, it springs up afresh; so it is that if even the smallest atom of lust has not been eradicated, one will not leave behind this ever-recurring suffering (i.e., existence).
19. As he who has himself made a weapon is killed by it when in the robber’s hands, so likewise the being in whose heart lust has arisen will be killed by it.
20. Knowing then the sufferings that come from lust and its punishment: having cast off lust, without eagerness for anything, the reflective Bhixu has departed entirely (from this world).
Chapter on Lust, the Third.
IV. PURITY.
1 (21). THE pure man knows not death; he who is impure dwells with death; he who is pure will not die; 1 he who is impure dies repeatedly.
2 (22). The wise who know this difference delight in modesty and purity; their pleasure is that of the elecL2
3 (23). With this (idea) incessantly present to their minds, and always firm in their resolution to gain the other side, they (finally) enjoy nirvâṇa,3 ,that unsurpassable felicity.
4 (28). When the wise men through earnestness have overcome heedlessness, then, steadfast through wisdom, they ascend to above the abode of the gods, and, free from sorrow and pain, they look down as from the summit of a mountain at the fools on the face of the earth.
5 (25). The wise man through earnestness, virtue, and purity makes himself an island which no flood can submerge.
6. ’Tis the earnest that become far-famed by their diligence, reflection, the purity of their lives, their judgment, their perfect observance (of the commandments), by their whole life which is according to the law.
7. One must apply oneself to acquire superior insight and the foundation of the condition of the Muni He who is wrapped up in his uninterrupted thoughts of peace knows no sorrow (ṇibbuta).
8. Have nothing to do with false doctrines, have nothing to do with the heedless; he who delights not in false theories shall not continue (in) the world.
9. He who has correct ideas of the world shall acquire such greatness, that though he goes through a thousand regenerations, he shall not fall into the evil way.
10. The (mind of the) fool who is given up to carelessness is perverted; the wise man must be careful, as is the head of a caravan watching his treasures.
11. He who is not given up to carelessness, who finds no delight in pleasures, whose mind is always attentive, will put an end to sorrow.
----------
12. He who has put an end to sorrow, and is not given to carelessness in this world, can no more be hurt by the careless than can the lion by the antelope.
13 (309). The shameless man who covets his neighbour’s wife will experience these four conditions: he acquires @ad) reputation, troubled sleep, thirdly scorn, and fourthly he goes to hell.
14 (310). He who, acting not virtuously, doeth evil, indulges but for a moment, amidst fear and trembling, his burning passion, and then he has to bear the heavy punishment of the king, and he is burnt in hell.
15. He who seeks after happiness, let him act vigorously; the steadfast makes no slothful exertions like those of the foolish waggoners.
16.When the fools with their waggons have given up the highroad and have entered a bad road, they deeply grieve over their mistake.
17. In like manner, the fool who gives up the law and follows that which is not the law falls into the power of the lord of death; he also is destroyed by reason of his want of sight.
18. They who do not what ought to be done, and who do that which ought not to be done, who glory in their carelessness, increase the extent of their troubles, and he who adds to his misery finds its cessation a long way off..
19. He who comprehends the nature of the body, who reflects, and whose exertions are unceasing, does not what ought sot to be done, and does what ought to be done. 20. He, therefore, with memory and understanding will put an end to his misery, and when he has put an end to his misery (âsrava), he will find the untroubled state.
21. As many as you be, I declare unto you that those who, though they have heard but little of the law, have followed its commandments, have understood the law; they who follow the law have understood the law.
22 (19). Even if the careless man can recite a large portion (of the lam), he follows it not; he is like a cowherd counting the cattle of others; he has no share in the priesthood?
23 (20). He who, though he can only recite a few lines (of the law), walks in the path of the law, and has forsaken passion, anger, and ignorance, he has a share in the priesthood.
24. He whose speech exalts earnestness and who always despises heedlessness will be greater among the gods than he who has made a hundred sacrifices.
25. The sage who praises earnestness in his speech knows what is right and what is wrong; the sage holds fast to earnestness for two reasons:
for the blessings it brings this life, and also on account of the future; the steadfast who have understood this are called sages.
26 (327). The Bhixu who delights in purity and who looks with dread on impurity will pull himself from out the evil way as the elephant pulls himself from out the mire.
27. The Bhixu who delights in purity and who looks with dread on impurity shakes off sin as does the wind the leaves of a tree.
----------
28. The Bhixu who delights in purity and who looks with dread on impurity puts an end to all attachments and gradually arrives at felicity.
29. The Bhixu who delights in purity and who looks with dread on impurity arrives at perfect comprehension of rest from the sanskâra, the perfection of peace.
30. The Bhixu who delights in purity and who looks with dread on impurity is so near nirvâṇa that he cannot fail (to reach it). 31. The diligent and virtuous man, who lives according to the law: finds by following the law happiness in this world and in the other.
32. Ye who are earnest in learning for the sake of rest (nirvâṇa), exerting yourselves and fled with application,
consider well the lives of those unreflecting careless, negligent, uncontrolled, and lazy men who have turned away from learning, and hearken not to the unreflecting.
----------
33. The Bhixu who is truly morale and who delights in earnestness brings thus all his thoughts well under control, and his mind is in safety.
34. Arise, commence a new life, turn towards the doctrine of the Buddha; trample down the hosts of the lord of death as an elephant does a house of mud?
35. Whoever has lived according to this law of discipline, in gentleness and purity, will, having cast off transmigration, put an end to his misery.
Chapter on Purity, the Fourth.
V. AGREEABLE THINGS.
1 (212). FROM those things that are agreeable comes sorrow; from those things that are agreeable comes fear: if one casts off agreeable things he will be without sorrow, without fear.
2. From that which is enjoyable l comes fear; from the agreeable comes misery, from the agreeable fear: if that which is pretty changes, one reaps but despair.
3. The miseries of the world are numerous - sorrow, lamentations, cries, &c. they all arise from holding on to those things that are agreeable: if one gives up what is agreeable they will all cease to be.
4. They for whom there is nothing whatever agreeable in the world are happy and without sorrow; they therefore who would be without affliction, free from human passions: must never do that which is agreeable.
5 (210). Not to see what is agreeable is painful, so likewise is the sight of what is not agreeable; one must never seek what is agreeable; he must not seek what is not agreeable.
6. It is by being deprived of what is agreeable and by finding what is disagreeable that men create (for themselves) the intolerable sorrow of age.
7. When that in which one delights does die, such as one’s kinsfolk or friends, it brings one a great and enduring sorrow, for to be separated from that which brings pleasure is painful.
8. He who knows neither agreeable or disagreeable is without bonds; he, therefore, who considers the agreeable as sinful will give up what is agreeable.
9. He who, having ceased to consider what is agreeable, has nought to do with attachment to (worldly) happiness, who has attachment to the happiness that is not that of the individual, seeks the object of his fond desires (nirvâṇa)?
10. He who among gods and men is held by fondness for what is pleasing in the body (rūpa), does evil and suffers affliction, he falls into the power of age and death.
11. He who is steadfast both by day and night, who casts away what is pleasing in the body (rūpa), which is difficult to do, pulls up by the very roots sin, that food of Mâra.
12. The foolish people: who consider what is not good as good, what is not agreeable as agreeable, what is misery as happiness, will surely come to destruction.
13. He who, doing evil, would be made happy by it, finds no contentment, let him not do evils
14. He who, doing what is right, would be made happy by it, finds contentment, let him not do evil.
15. As the frontier town is protected by strong retrenchments, so let him who would be happy protect himself by strong defences.
16 (157). The wise man who would be made happy watches during all the three watches; his watchfulness makes him safe.
17 (315). When the frontier town is well guarded within and without, its peace is not disturbed: 1 do likewise and watch thyself; for when one has been born in hell his peace is gone and he repents him (of what he has left undone).
18. Look where you will, there is nothing dearer to man than himself; therefore, as it is the same thing that is dear to you and to others, hurt not others with what pains yourself.
20 (130). To all men this life is dear; all men fear punishment; you, who are like unto them, strike not, put not to death.
21. He who has been to a great distance and who returns from afar without mishap, his assembled kinsfolk and friends receive him with joyful cries of "Alala!"
22. So likewise he who has been virtuous: on arriving from this world into another, his good works receive him like kinsfolk and welcome him.
23. Lay up, therefore, good works in view of the other world; for it is good works that receive beings in the other world.
24. He whose life is one of virtue is praised by the gods; he in whom there is nothing to be blamed finds perfect joy in heaven.
25. He who observes the law, who is perfectly virtuous, modest, speaking the truth, doing what he ought to do, delights the rest of mankind.
26. He who, doing what he ought to do, and who, extolling the true law, gives to others pleasure, shall find joy in the other world.
27. His speech is edifying, and he has given up all wrong doings, in this delights the righteous, and delights not the unrighteous.
28. Therefore what is good and what is not good are separated at death; the unrighteous go to hell, the righteous go to heaven?
Chapter on Pleasure, the Fifth.
VI. MORALITY (ÇÎLA).
1. THE sage, for the sake of acquiring the three kinds of happiness, praiseworthiness, treasures: and to go to the abode of happiness in the other world, watches well his conduck
2. The sage, besides these objects, watches well his conduct for the sake of acquiring saintliness, most perfect sight: and worldly peace.
3. Morality brings happiness; the body is free from pain; at night one’s rest is peaceful, and on awakening one is still happy. 4. The wise, who are charitable, and who observe the (other) moral precepts, acquire by the merit of charity endless happiness in this world and in the other.
5. It is well for him who observes, even unto old age, morality and virtue and who is a believer: wisdom is the greatest treasure of man; it would be hard indeed for a robber to steal away the merit (of one’s good works).
----------
6-7. The Bhixu who observes the moral laws: whose senses are controlled, who is sober in his food, who gives not himself up to sleep; he who is thus diligent, who is never lazy day and night, is so near nirvâṇa that he cannot possibly fail (to reach it).
8. Observing the moral laws, his mind and understanding diligent in meditation, by such a life will the Bhixu arrive at the destruction of misery.
9. He consequently who is careful to observe the moral laws and meditation will acquire supernatural sight and discriminate according to knowledge.
10. Then he will, having destroyed all his attachments: enfranchised his mind, be separated from all things, and, possessed of knowledge, he goes beyond an incalculable quantity of sorrows.
11. He who devotes himself to these three things, morality, meditation, and knowledge, arrives finally at perfect purity, and puts an end to pain and also to existence.
12. He who is released from the bonds of the passions, who has cast away the body and who has wisdom: has passed beyond the kingdom of M&ra,2 and shines in splendour as does the sun.
13. A Bhixu who outwardly and inwardly is impure and arrogant will not arrive at the perfection of morality, meditation, and wisdom.
14. The rain falls from a sky covered by clouds, it falls not from a clear sky; remove then that which obscures (the mind) S and the rain will not fall.
15. He who always sees and keeps the moral laws of the Bhixu does speedily arrive on the road to nirvâṇa at perfect purity.
16 (54). The odour of the flower travels not against the wind, nor does that of aloe-wood: of incense, or of tchandana.
The odour of the holy travels even against the wind; all regions are pervaded by the fragrance of the perfect man.
17 (55). Incense, tchandana, utpala, and mallika, among these sweet perfumes the sweet odour of morality (or virtue) is unsurpassed.
18 (56). How mean is the sweet odour that comes from incense (tagara) and tchandana; the sweet odour of those who possess morality penetrates even heaven.
19 (57). They therefore who live in thoughtfulness, who are perfectly purified by their moral conduct, and who are emancipated by the perfectness of their knowledge: will not meet with the road of Mâra.
20. This is the road that leads to happiness; he who has entered on this road of perfect purity will by keeping to it cast off the bonds of Mâra.
Chapter of Morality, the Sixth.
VII. VIRTUOUS CONDUCT.
1. HE who casts away wickedness in the body for a virtuous bodily course of life will be secure in his body if he is guarded against the great sins of the body.
2. He who casts away wickedness in speech for virtuous speech will be secure in his speech if he is guarded against the great sins of speech.
3. He who has cast away wickedness in thought for virtuous thoughts will be secure in his thoughts if he is guarded against the great sins of thought.
4. He who has cast away wickedness in the body, who has cast away wickedness in speech, who has cast away wickedness in (his) thoughts, has cast away likewise all other stains.
5. He who does what is virtuous in the body, he who is virtuous in his speech, he who is virtuous in his thoughts, will possess the four immeasurables.
6. He who is virtuous in body, speech, and mind, obtains unceasing happiness here and in the other world.
7. The sage whose body is well controlled can be harmed by nothing; he goes to an immortal dwelling-place, where there is no sorrow.
8. The sage whose speech is well controlled can be harmed by nothing; he goes to an immortal dwelling-place, where there is no sorrow.
9. The sage whose thoughts are always controlled can be harmed by nothing; he goes to an immortal dwelling-place, where there is no sorrow.
10. The steadfast control their bodies, the steadfast control their speech, the steadfast control their minds; when the steadfast are well controlled in everything, they go to an immortal dwelling-place, where there is no sorrow.
11. It is good to control the body, it is good to control the tongue (speech), it is good to control the mind; to have everything controlled is good: the Bhixu who is entirely controlled is freed from all sorrows.
12. Watching over his speech, his mind well controlled, doing nothing that is evil with his body, by observing these three ways of doing one finds the way spoken of by the Rischi.
Chapter on Virtuous Conduct, the Seventh.
VIII. SPEECH.
1 (306). He who says he has not done that which he has done, and he who is a liar, will go to hell; both these men alike, having gone to the next world, will be in a degraded state.
2. Every man that is born, and. who speaks wicked words, will cut himself with the axe of speech that has been born (with him).
3. He who praises a man who ought to be blamed, and who blames a man worthy of praise, brings sin (upon himself) with his mouth; he who is sinful will not find happiness.
4. He who in this world loses his wealth at dice is a little sinfu;l he whose mind is evilly disposed towards the Tathâgata is an extremely sinful p e r s n .
5. He who in this world uses his speech and mind in reviling an Ariya will go for ten millions (of lives) to the Nirabbudas hell, and for a thousand and forty-one to the Abbudas.
6. He who in the sinfulness of his mind accuses one who is not sinful of guilt, increases his own punishment in hell. He who has the might (of wisdom) makes no wrong use of his speech; not even in his mind does he imagine strife.
7 (164). They whose minds are perverted by false doctrines (heresies), and who renounce the teaching and the mode of living of the elect (Ariyas) and Arhats, are destroyed on account of their wicked deeds as is the reed by its seed
8. One must only speak what is right, and must not speak evilly; from wicked words comes evil: one ought consequently to use proper language.
9. The fool speaks wickedly, and it is by his speech that he is held in bondage; when one uses this kind of language and rejects the other,? him I call not a sage.
10. The Bhixus, who watch over their speech, who speak leisurely and without arrogance, who, in possession of the Law, do teach its value, their speech is pleasing.
11. Well-spoken language is the principal thing, says the Ariya; to speak kindly and not unkindly is the second (best thing); to speak the truth and not lies is the third; to speak what is right and not what is futile is the furth.
12. He who speaks words which bring him no grief and which will do no harm to his neighbour, speaks weL2
13. Let one speak pleasing words, which, when he has spoken them, bring joy to his neighbour, and, being received with pleasure, cause him to commit no sin?
14. To speak the truth is (like) amrita; truth cannot be surpassed. The truth is holding fast to what is good and to ’what is right, say the righteousS4
15. The words which the Buddha speaks and which remove all misery are words of truth; those that lead to nirvâṇa cannot be surpassed.
Chapter on Speech, the Eighth.
IX. DEEDS.
1 (176). THE man who gives up the one (great) law (i.e., truth), the means of gaining (happiness in) the other world, and who speaks lies, there is no evil that he will not do.
2. Better it would be that a man should eat a lump of flaming iron than that one who is unrestrained and who has broken his vows should live on the charity of the land.
3. If thou art filled with the dread of suffering, if there is naught agreeable for thee in suffering do then no evil thing openly, or even in secret.
4. If thou hast done evil deeds, or if thou wouldst do them, thou mayest arise and run where’er thou wilt, but thou canst not free thyself of thy suffering.
5. There exists no spot on the earth, or in the sky, or in the sea, neither is there any in the mountain-clefts, where an (evil) deed does not bring trouble (to the doer).
6. When one has looked at those around him and has seen their wicked deeds,’ let him not do likewise; walk not in the way of sin.
7. He who commits crimes: who uses false measure^,^ who hurts men, or who does any other similar deeds, will by walking in this path fall into a precipice.
8. Whatsoever a man has done, whether it be virtuous or sinful deeds, there are none that are of little importance; they all bear some kind of fruit.
9. As long as men are united, so long will they be the conquerors; but if they would be victorious by other means, they will find out that they will be conquered.
10. The fool who sees not this walks on in his wicked way, but he who does evil will find out his (mistake) in the other worlde
11 (136). The fool sees not that his evil deeds, when they shall have matured, will still be burning. Hereafter his deeds will torment him as if burnt by fire.
12 (66). The fool of little understanding treats himself as he would an enemy; he does evil deeds which will bear burning fruit.
13 (67). The deed which harms, and of which the reward is received with tears and a downcast face, that deed is not well done.
14 (68). The deed which harms not, and of which the reward is received with joy and happiness, that deed is well done.
15 (69). When a man in the pursuit of his pleasure accomplishes an evil deed, it brings smiles to his face; but when his evil deed has ripened, it brings him sorrow.
16 (71). Surely an evil deed does not turn on a sudden like milk;3 it is like fire smouldering in the ashes, which burns the fool.
17. An evil deed kills not instantly, as does a sword, but it follows the evil-doer (even) into the next world.
18. How burning is (an evil deed) when it has arrived at maturity, the evil-doers will find out in the other world.
19 (240). As iron, when the rust doth take hold of it, is eaten by it, so in like manner is the heedless man brought into the evil way by his own deed.
Chapter on Deeds, the Ninth.
X. FAITH
1. FAITH, modesty, morality, charity, these virtues are lauded by holy men; by them one goes to the world of the gods; this road, I declare, leads to the land of the gods.
2 (177). The avaricious go not to the world of the gods (devas), for the fool commends not charity: they who are steadfast rejoice greatly in charity, also they enjoy happiness in the other (world).
3. Faith is the greatest treasure of man in this (world)," for he who in this (world) observes this law finds happiness: truth has the sweetest of all flavours, and to live according to knowledge is, I declare, the best of lives.
4. If the wise man has faith in the doctrine of the Arhats that leads to nirvâṇa: and if he listens respectfully, he will acquire that knowledge.
5. By earnestness one is saved from the ocean: and by faith from out the river; by earnestness misery is removed ; by wisdom one is purified.
6. The Bhixu whose associate is faith and who is full of wisdom will cut off all his bonds for the sake of attaining nirvâṇa.
7. The wise man who has real faith, morality, wisdom, and who does keep them present in his mind, casts off all sins; he, I declare, is in the good way.
8. He who has perfect faith and morality, who casts off all avarice, and is liberal: wheresoever he goes, he will be honoured.
9. The wise man in this world holds fast to faith and wisdom; these are his greatest treasures; he casts aside all other riches.
10. He who likes to look on holy men, who delights to hear the Law, who has cast away the stains of avarice, he must be called "faithful."
11. One must lay up provisions of faith; for it is not possible to deprive one of his lot of merit, and one need have no fear of the robbing of thieves. Happy are the Gramanas who have acquired it, and happy is the wise man when he meets with (such) a Sramana.
12. Men give according to their inclination or according t o their faith. He whose mind is made unhappy by what another eats and drinks finds no composure by day or night.
13 (250). He who has put an end to this (feeling), as he would cut off the top of a tala-tree: finds composure by day and by night.
14. One must not associate with him who is without faith, for he is like a dried-up well, which, if it be dug out, only gives muddy, dirty water.
15. Let the wise associate with the faithful, who are like a great and limpid river: like a cool and untroubled lake.
16. The Muni is affected by those who have kindly feelings, or by those who have them not; have then nothing to do with the unfaithful, and associate with the faithful.
Chapter on Faith, the Tenth.
----------
----------
XI. THE ÇRAMANA.
1 (383). CAST off desires, O Brâhmana, stop the stream (of birth) by thy earnestness; he who is not able to cast away all desires cannot h d the one (perfect state).
2 (313). The irresolute and careless Parivrâdjakas only heap up sins again and again;3 he who is diligent and earnest knows how to do that which ought to be done.
3. An irresolute act, badly performed penance, an unrighteous life, bring no great profite
4 (311). If an arrow is badly grasped, it cuts the hand; the Çramana who performs his duties badly is on the way to hell.
5. If an arrow is properly grasped, it does not cut the hand; in like manner, the Çramana who exactly performs his duties is on the way to nirvâṇa.
6. The ignorant Çramana, who finds it hard to cross (the stream), hard to be patient, who is filled with the many sorrows that his faint-heartedness brings him:
7. The Çramana whose life is like this, is subject to the ever-recurring grief, of which he cannot free himself, of one who is Wed with indecision.
8. He who is a bad priest, who delights in sin, and who, as a layman, is given to sinful deeds, addicted to everything that is bad, he lays up for himself the wretchedness of regeneration.
9. Many of those who wear the patched saffron-coloured gown are unrestrained and delight in wickedness; these bad men go to perditin.
10 (162). He who, breaking all his vows, (is held) as is a sâla-tree by a creeper: brings himself to that state to which his enemy would like to bring him.
11. Though one’s hair may be grey, one is not for that reason admitted among the elders; he has reached old age: but he is called " Old-in-vain."
12. He who is virtuous, who has cast off sin, who is a Bramachârin, and free of all (impurities), he is called " an elder."
13 (264). He whose conduct is bad and who speaks lies, though his head be shaven, is not a Çramana. They who live in ignorance and lust, how can they be Çramanas?
14 (265). He whose conduct is bad and who speaks lies, though his head be shaven, is not a Çramana; he who has " quieted " sin, him the wise know to be a Çramana. 15. He whose conduct is bad and who speaks lies, though his head be shaven, is not a Çramana; but he who, having distinguished all sins, great and small, does keep away from them and does " quiet" sin, he is called "a Çramana."
16. He who has "cast off sin" is a Brâhmana; he who does " quiet" sin is a Çramana; he who has cast off all his impurities is for that reason called a priest.
Chapter on "The Çramana," the Eleventh.
XII THE WAY.
1. WHEN one’s wisdom has brought him to see the four holy truths, the knowledge of this way will destroy all love of existence.
2. As the dust is raised by the wind and is laid by the falling rain, in like manner he who has the eye of wisdom, his whole mind is at rest.
3. That knowledge which enables one to put an end to birth and death, and by which one is freed of the world, that is the best (kind of knowledge).
4 (273). Among truths the four truths (are the best); the eightfold way is the best of ways; the best of bipeds is he who sees; the greatest of virtues (dharma), passionlessness.
5 (277). "All created things are impermanent; " when one has seen this through knowledge, he is no longer afflicted by pain: this is the way to perfect purity.
6 (278). "All created things are grief;" when one has seen this through knowledge, he is no more afflicted by pain: this is the way to perfect purity.
7 (279). "All created things are empty (çunyata);" when one has seen this through knowledge, he is no more afflicted by pain: this is the way to perfect purity.
8. " All created things are unreal; " l when one has seen this through knowledge, he is no more afflicted by pain: this is the way to perfect purity.
9 (276). I have taught you that this way cuts off the pain of existence. The Tathâgata is a teacher; you yourselves must strive after (nirvâṇa).
10. I have taught you that this way removes the pain of passion. The Tathâgata is a teacher; you yourselves must strive after (nirvâṇa).
11 (274). There is no other road but this one that leads to perfect enlightenment; by concentrating your mind on it you will cast off the bonds of Mâra.
12. This way is straight: it leads one to the other world; it is the one road to the ocean of purity. Çakyamuni, well composed and wise, expounds this again and again to the multitude.
13. Having discovered the ending of birth and death, through kindness and compassion I will teach the way, the only road. After having crossed the stream (of sin), I will teach others to cross as I have crossed.
14. The way to reach complete cessation (from existence): control, purity; the way to put an end to the recurrence of birth and death; the means of distinguishing all the dhâtus:4 that is what he who has the eye (of wisdom) teaches by this way.
15. As the waters of the Ganges flow swiftly on and empty into the ocean, so likewise he who walks in the even way of perfect knowledge shall arrive at the cessation of death?
16. He who, through compassion towards all creatures, does turn the wheel of the law, heretofore unheard, the Protector, the teacher of gods and men, he who has arrived at the end of corporeal existence, him do (I) worship?
17. By obtaining the perception of the three happinesses? and by casting off the three unhappy things: one will by these perceptions, and by attending to them, arrive at peace: (it is) as the dust (râga) laid by the rain, when the mind and manner are at peace, one then enjoys the felicity of the unsurpassable bodhi
18. His mind attached to the three kinds of samSdhi,5 he meditates in solitude on the (four) immeasurables; thus does the reflective and wise man undo the knots,’ and tear (himself away) from the three regions (of desire) by means of the three?
19. He who has wisdom for a weapon, diligence as his might, who iscreflective,10 well composed, and who delights in meditation (samâdhi), having comprehended the origin and destruction of worldly (existence), will obtain perfect emancipation: he who has comprehended the ending of worldly (existence), he, I declare, is called "one who has put an end to worldly (existence) and has arrived at the other (shore)."
20. He whose mind is concentrated on the holy eightfold way, the straight way, has found the immortal (lit. amrita); by following it he finds the much-longed-for happiness, and by finding what is so praiseworthy he increases (his) fame?
Chapter on " The Way," the Twelfth.
BOOK II. XIII HONOURS (Satkâra)
1. As the she-mule (dies) on account of her offspring, as the reed and the plantain decay on bearing fruit, so likewise is the foolish man destroyed by honors.
2 (72). No matter how long the fool sacrifices, he will not cease from being infatuated; the fool’s bright lot goes on decreasing until it brings to sorrow even the crown of his head.
3 (73). The fool wishes for riches, for the subjection of the Bhixus (to his orders), for lordship in the abode (of the clergy), to receive the homages of other people.
4 (74). " Let both priests and laymen, whosoever they may be, imagine that it is I (who have done it); in whatever is to be done or not done, let them be subject to me; " such is the mind of the fool, and his desires greatly increase?
5 (75). One is the way to wealth, another is the road to nirvâṇa; if the Bhixu, the disciple of the Buddha, has learnt this, he finds no pleasure in honours, but seeks after perfect seclusion (from the world).
6. Retain no fondness for anything; deceive no man; give up any occupation; in (following) the law one must not be engaged in commerce.
7. Look after what is to your own profit and envy not what is to that of another, for the Bhixu who does envy another cannot find tranquillity (samâdhi).
8. If a Çramana aspires to lead a happy life, let him put on the gown (sanghâti) of the priesthood and receive alms of food and drink. 9. If a Çramana aspires to lead a happy life, let him keep to a dwelling-place (of the priesthood), as the reptile does to the rat’s hole.1
----------
10. If a Çramana aspires to lead a happy life, let him be contented with the meanest things: and think only of the greatest of laws.
----------
11. Though one does not know much, if one keeps well the moral precepts, leading (such) a life according to his knowledge, men say of him in praise, "he is not heedless."
----------
12. If one possesses the three spotless sciences that overcome the lord of, death: the fool thinks he knows nothing, and that he can blame him.
13. He who is under the rule of misery and sin, if he has but food, drink, and wealth, him the fool will praise.
14. He whose head is shaven, and who wears the saffron-coloured gown, but who seeks only for food, drink, clothes, and bedding: is his greatest enemy.
15. When, therefore, one knows the sinfulness and danger of honours, with but few desires, and having cast away all agitation of the mind, the reflective Bhixu wanders here and there.
16. The mind cannot become dispassionate with but a scrap of food, for one must eat to retain this life; he, consequently, who knows that this body only exists through eating, goes to collect alms.
17. This is what the wise reverence and honour: the removal of every atom of the grief of misery, which is a difficult task, and men honour him who is patient and painstaking; learn, therefore, how to recognise the swamp (and to keep away from it).
Chapter on Honours, the Thirteenth.
XIV HATRED.
1. HATRED towards those who do no evil and who do not; hate, this is the sign (lit. garment) of the sinner in this world and in the other.
2. After having brought misery on himself, he would afterwards bring trouble to others, like unto the hunting hawk, (?) who, captive himself, does injury to othex
3. He who smites will be smitten; he who shows rancour will find rancour; so likewise from reviling comes reviling, and to him who is angered comes anger.
4. Those foolish gramanas who know not the holy law, though this life be brief, in the foolishness of their hearts they give themselves to wrangling.
5. "This is the best (man)," they think, being thus at variance with the unanimous opinion: " Why does the clergy choose this man? he is without strength and without mind."
6. If a bone is broken, (they advise) killing, carrying off horses, cattle, and riches, subduing kingdoms, and then afterwards to become friends again.
----------
7-8. But the wise man, who knows what is (right), says: "Why do you not learn this law, which teaches the real way to live?" (lit. field of activity).
You who have not the conduct of sages, watch carefully over the words of your mouth; guard those of your neighbours who do not know (the danger they may run); they who know (this law), speak soft-toned pleasing words."
9 (3). "He abused me, he reviled me, he beat me, he subdued me;" he who keeps this in his mind, and who feels resentment, will find no peace.
10 (4). "He abused me, he reviled me, he beat me, he subdued me;" he who keeps not this in his mind, and is not resentful, will find peace.
11 (5). He who shows hatred to those who hate will never be at peace; he who is patient with those who hate will find peace; this is the spirit of religion.
12. He who bears ill-will to those who bear ill-will can never become pure; but he who feels no ill-will, pacifies them who hate: as hatred brings misery to mankind, the sage knows no hatred.
13. If a man find a wise companion: who is both steadfast and pure, let him, having overcome all corruption, associate with him, thoughtful and glad.
14 (329). If a man find not a wise companion, who is both steadfast and pure, like a king abandoning his broad kingdom: let him live alone and commit no sin.
15 (61). If a man find not a good friend who leads a life like unto his own, let him resolutely keep a solitary life, and not associate with a fool.
16 (330). It is better to live a lonely life than to have companionship with the fool; casting off all taxation of mind, one lives alone, like the elephant of the Mâtanga forest.
----------
Chapter on Hatred, the Fourteenth.
XV REFLECTION (SMRITI).
1. IT is the teaching of the Buddha, that whoever (commences by) reflecting on the operation of breathing, and who goes on through the different stages (of meditation), his mind well composed, will reach perfection, as the sun and moon, when free from clouds, illuminate the whole world.
2. He who, standing, sitting, and sleeping, keeps both body and mind under control, such a thoughtful and well-controlled Bhixu will find the above-mentioned and other blessings; and if he has obtained the above-mentioned and the other blessings, he will not go to where is the lord of death.
3. He who continually reflects on what appertains to the body, and has well under control the six senses (8yntanas), and who is always well composed, knows the extinction of sorrow.
4. He who continually reflects on what appertains to the body in all its different shapes, on being without self, without attachment for the "mine," will not care for self; he will have no attachment for the "mine: " in this manner will the Bhixu swiftly cross over from the regions of desire.
5. He who is thoughtful, wise, well composed, happy: and pure, and who attends carefully at all times to this law, will, I declare, cross over from birth and old age.
6. Thus learning to be always on his guard, the wise, thoughtful, and diligent Bhixu, after having cast off all bonds, finds by this means the destruction of sorrow (nirvâṇa).
7. They who are awake can watch better than they who sleep, I tell you; it is better to watch than to sleep, for he who watches has no fear.
8. He who is watchful and diligent is safe day and night, and he mill find the end of pain (kleçâ) in the longed-for cessation of death (nirvâṇa).
9. They who day and night are reflecting on the Buddha, and who go to the Buddha for a refuge, these men have the profits of mankind.
10. They who day and night are reflecting on the law (dharma), and who go to the law for a refuge, these men have the profits of mankind.
11. They who day and night are reflecting on the church (sangha), and who go to the church for a refuge, these men have the profits of mankind.
12 (296). The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night reflecting on the Buddha.
13 (297). The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night reflecting on the law.
14 (298). The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night reflecting on the church.
----------
----------
15. The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night reflecting on the laws of morality (çîla).
16. The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night reflecting on renunciation.
17. The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night reflecting on the way. 18 (299). The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night reflecting on what appertains to the body. 19. The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night keeping in mind the four kinds of meditation (samâdhi)?
20. The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night delighting in the cessation of death.
21 (300). The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night delighting in kindness of heart. 22 (301). The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night delighting in meditation.
----------
----------
----------
23. The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night delighting in the unconditioned.
24. The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night delighting in the uncharacteristic. 25. The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night delighting in solitude. 26. The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night delighting in what leads to savation.
27. The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night delighting in nothing (worldly).
----------
28. The disciple of Gautama is always well awake, day and night rejoicing in nirvâṇa.
Chapter on Rejection, the Fifteenth.
XVI. MISCELLANEOUS.
1. WHEN you feel inclined to do a thing, commence by examining it: " If I had only done thus at first, one wishes when it is too late.
2. I would have seen the real nature of desire, and that it becomes a fetter;" let one watch what he does as long as he is striving after perfection.
3 (238). By application and diligence one will make oneself all island. Remove thine impurities as does the smith those of the silver: thine impurities removed and free from sin, thou shalt find no more birth and old age.
4 (316, 317). He who is ashamed of what is not shameful, and not ashamed of what is shameful, who fears what is not fearful, and who fears not what is fearful, that man has wrong views and will be lost.
5 (172). He who formerly was heedless and who afterwards has become careful, like the moon free from clouds, he brightens up the whole world?
6. He who formerly was heedless and who afterwards has become careful will by reflecting leave behind him the desires of this world.
7 (382). He who has entered the priesthood when young and who follows the doctrines of the Buddha, like the moon free from clouds, he brightens up the whole world.
8. He who is a young priest and who follows the doctrine of the Buddha will by reflecting leave behind him the desires of this world.
9 (173). He who covers up his evil deeds by good deeds brightens up the whole of this world like the moon free from clouds.
10. He who covers up his evil deeds by good deeds will by reflecting leave behind him the desires of this world.
----------
11. He who delights not in life, finds no sorrow in death; he knows the reward of earnestness, and is without pain even in the midst of or row.
12. He who delights not in life finds no sorrow in death; he knows the reward of earnestness, and is a shining light to the rest of his relatives.
13. The Bhixu who by meditating on virtue has cast off sin leaves his home for a homeless condition, which is the true field of activity, and then, having learnt what is real joy, he casts off every desire.
14. One whose heart is always pure, pure by always confessing his sins, in every act observing the way of purity, will reach perfectin.
15 (356). ’Tis weeds that do damage a field, ’tis passions that damage mankind; he therefore who gives to them who are without passions will receive a great r e a r d .
16 (357). ’Tis weeds that do damage a field: ’tis hatred that does damage mankind; he therefore who gives to them who are without hatred will receive a great reward.
17 (358). ’Tis weeds that do damage a field, ’tis ignorance that does damage mankind; he therefore who gives to them who are without ignorance will receive a great reward.
18. ’Tis weeds that do damage a field, ’tis selfishness that does damage mankind; he therefore who gives to them who are without selfishness will receive a great reward.
19 (359). ’Tis weeds that do damage a field, ’tis lust that does damage mankind; he therefore who gives to them who are without lust will receive a great reward.
20. ’Tis weeds that do damage a field, ’tis desire (trîchnâ) that does damage mankind; he therefore who gives to them who are without desires will receive a great reward.
21. (These) six are lord and master. If one is given to passion (râga), he has (all) the passions; if one is without passion (râga), he is without (any of) the passions. He who is passionate is called a fool.
22 (150). When a citadel has been made of bones, plastered over with flesh and blood: passion, hatred, and selfishness dwell together in it.
23. They who do not perceive the source from whence comes all their misery are held in bondage; they who have found it out leave the waters (of sin) and cross over to the other side, where they are free from passions.
Chapter on Miscellanies, the Sixteenth.
XVII WATER.
1 (911). THEY who, with all their energy given to reflection, find no pleasure in a home, like a swan who leaves a polluted lake, they leave their homes and cross the stream.
2. The steadfast depart from the world: having overcome the troops of Mâra; they are like unto swans in the path of the sun, moving in the ether by means of their miraculous power (irddhi).
3 (155). They who do not live like Brahmatchâris, and who do not acquire wealth in their youth, become like old herons on the banks of a polluted pool with few fish.
4 (156). They who do not live like Brahmatchâris, and who do not acquire wealth in their youth, remembering what they have formerly done, they lie thirsting for the past.
5 (121). Think not "Evil is of little importance; it will not follow after me;" for as a large vase is filled by the falling of drops of water, so will the fool become full of evil, even if he gathers it little by little.
6 (122). Think not "Virtue is of little importance; it will not follow after me;" for as a large pot is filled by the falling of drops of water, so will the earnest man become full of virtue, even if he gathers it little by little.
7. Longing to leave the vast and turbid lake and to cross the waters of the ocean, the wise man is carried across in the vessel that he has prepared.
8. When he has crossed over: he shall inhabit the promised land of the Enlightened, of the Blessed, of the Brâhmana; therefore let the Bhixus, and they who listen (to my doctrine), washing themselves clean (of sin), make ready a vessel. 9 (82). The wise and excellent man who listens to the law becomes like a deep, limpid, and pure lake.
10. When there is water everywhere, who is there who would run about seeking the water of a well? What use is there for well water? Destroy then desires from the very roots?
11 (80). The scourer washes with water, the fletcher straightens his arrows) with fire, the carpenter hews his logs, the wise man shapes himself.
----------
12. Passionless as the firmament, firm as the lintel of the door: the wise man delights not in transmigration, which is like a troubled lake.
Chapter on Water, the Seventeenth.
XVIII THE FLOWER.
1. WHO is there that can overcome the world of the gods, of the lord of death (Yama) and of men, who knows how to expose the most delightful law, as one would flowers? l
2. It is the disciple (sekhas) who can overcome the world of the gods, of the lord of death and of men, who knows how to expose the most delightful law, as one would flowers.
3. Fear is born of the forest (of ignorance); so cut down not (only) the trees of the forest, but all that appertains to the forest (i.e., the roots), and then the Çramana will find nirvâṇa.
4. If man destroys not everything that appertains to the forest down to the smallest part, his mind will be held in bondage, as the calf that wants milk is to its mother’s side.
5 (285). Cut out the love of self as you would an autumn lotus; cherish the road of peace on account of the nirvâṇa which the Victorious One has explained.
6 (51). Like a pretty flower, of pleasing colour but without scent, are the agreeably spoken but fruitless words of one who does not act (accordingly).
7 (49). As the bee, which harms neither the colour nor the scent of the flower, but having sucked it flies away, so let the Muni walk through a village.
8 (50). Remarking not the sins of others, and what they have done or left undone, one should remark what he himself does right or wrong.
9 (58). As on piles of filth and in dirty water grows, unaffected by them, the padma, pure, sweet-smelling, and lovely,
----------
----------
10 (59). So the disciple of the perfect Buddha shines by his wisdom among other men, who are blind and (like) a heap of filth.
11 (53). As out of a heap of flowers many garlands are made, so when a man has been born he can do many virtuous deeds. 12 (377). As the vakula plant in summer sheds all its flowers, so let the Bhixu drop passions, hatred, and ignorance. 13 (47). A man whose mind is troubled, like one gathering flowers, the lord of death carries him off as the flood does a sleeping village.
14 (48). A man whose mind is troubled, like one gathering flowers, falls into the power of the lord of death without having satisfied his desires.
15. A man whose mind is troubled, like one gathering flowers, falls into the power of the lord of death without him having acquired wealth (enough to satisfy him).
16. A man whose mind is troubled, like one gathering flowers, falls into the power of the lord of death without having arrived at the object of his pursuit.
17. He who has perceived that this body is (empty) as a vase, and who knows that all things (dharma) are as an illusion, does thus destroy the chief of Mâra’s flowers, and will no more be seen by the king of death.
----------
18 (46). (4)He who has perceived that this world is like froth, and who knows that all things are as an illusion, does thus destroy the chief of Mhas flowers, and mill no more be seen by the king of death. 19. He who has perceived that this body is like froth, and who knows that all things are as an illusion, does thus destroy the chief of Mâra’s flowers, and mill no more be seen by the king of death.
20. (Repetition of verse.)
21. The Bhixu who knows that existence is without reality, like an udumbâra flower, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off his old dried-up skin.
22. The Bhixu who cuts off every particle of passion, as one does the flower from the water-born (lotus) growing in a tank, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off his old dried-up
23. The Bhixu who cuts off every particle of hatred, as one does the flower from the water-born (lotus) growing in a tank, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off his old dried-up skin.
24. The Bhixu who cuts off every particle of ignorance, as one does the flower of the water-born (lotus) growing in a tank, casts off what is and is not of the other shore: as a snake shuffles off his old dried-up skin.
25. The Bhixu who cuts off every particle of egotism, as one does the flower of the water-born (lotus) growing in a tank, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off his old dried-up skin.
26. The Bhixu who cuts of every particle of affection, as one does the flower of the water-born (lotus) growing in a tank, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off his old dried-up skin.
27. The Bhixu who cuts off every particle of desire, as one does the flower of the water-born (lotus) growing in a tank, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off his old dried-up skin.
Chapter on, "The Flower," the Eighteenth.
XIX THE HORSE.
1 (144). IF a good horse is struck with a whip, he is frightened and exerts himself with all his strength; so likewise when one is full of faith, morality, and meditation (samâdhi), having never aught to do with the phenomenal world (dharma), having his senses well composed, patient, and glad, thus goaded on he leaves the world completely behind?
2. If a good horse is struck with a whip, he is frightened and exerts himself with all his strength; so likewise when one is full of faith, morality, and meditation, having never aught to do with the phenomenal world, having knowledge and (observing) the fundamental (rules): thus goaded on he casts away every particle of misery.
3 (143). They who are well subdued, like well-broken horses, whose senses are so well controlled as to keep down anger, putting thus an end to sorrow, these Munis will soon be rejoicing among the gods.
4. The pure man has no intercourse with the careless, the vigilant with the slothful, as the good horse who is wise leaves the wild horses and wanders (alone).
5. He who minds modesty and knowledge as a good horse does the whip, and who is well composed by wisdom, cleanses himself of sin.
6 (321). The tamed (horse) is made to go to the place of assembly; the king rides the tamed (horse); the best among tamed men is he who patiently endures abuse.
7 (322). Better than the largest of elephants, than thoroughbred Sindhu horses, than well-broken mules, is he who tames himself.
8 (323). With one’s own well-tamed self one can reach peace, but with these other modes of conveyance it is not possible to reach that state.
9. Better than the largest of elephants, than thoroughbred Sindhu horses, than well-broken mules, is he who tames himself.
10. With one’s own well-tamed self one can arrive at the end of affliction, but with these other modes of conveyance it is not possible to reach that state.
11. Better than the largest of elephants, than thoroughbred Sindhu horses, than well-broken mules, is he who tames himself.
12. With one’s own well-tamed self one can cast off humanity, but with these other modes of conveyance it is not possible to reach that state.
13. Better than the largest of elephants, than thoroughbred Sindhu horses, than well-broken mules, is he who tames himself.
14. With one’s own well-tamed self one will depart, having severed one’s bonds, but with these other modes of conveyance it is not possible to reach that state.
15. He who would be tamed like a good horse must tame himself; with the self well tamed one reaches the end of affliction.
16. Self is the lord of self; self is the refuge of self: therefore break the self as you would a good horse.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
Chapter on "The Horse," the Nineteenth.
XX. ANGER.
1 (221). WHEN one has cast off anger, cast off selfishness, leaving behind every description of bondage, without any fondness for name and form, free from everything: he cannot fall into the way of passions.
2. Casting away rising anger, casting away the passions as soon as they show themselves, the steadfast man casting away all ignorance, will find happiness in the perception of the truth.
3. If one has cast away anger, his sleep is peaceful; if one has cast away anger, he knows no sorrow. Bhixus, destroy anger, which is the root of the poison; the elect declare that they who have overcome it, are without sorrow.
4. "There is nothing better than to master one’s anger." This is a great saying? for pain comes after anger, as it does when one has been burnt with fire.
5. He who is not chaste, without modesty, who gives way to anger, who is without restraint, he who is thus subdued by passion, who is there that cares for him?l
6. He who has but the strength of the ignorant has a strength which is not one. It is not likely that the fool who knows nothing of the law can attain perfection.
7. He who having strength is patient with those who are weak, him I call the most patient of men, submitting always to the opinions of the weak.
8. He who, though he is lord over others? is patient with those who are weak, him I call the most patient of men, submitting always to the opinions of the weak.
9. He who, having been chided, is patient though he be strong, him I call the most patient of men, submitting always to the opinions of the weak.
10. He who, knowing that his enemy is angered, remains peaceful himself, preserves himself and others from great dangers.
11. He who, knowing that his enemy is angered, remains peaceful himself, does that which is beneficial both to himself and to the other.
12. He who acts thus for the benefit of himself and others, they who know not the law, lightly think "He is a fool! "
----------
13. The words of the superior man are patient through fear (of the consequences); the patience that endures abuse and provocations, which endures humiliating words, that patience is the best, the sage says. 14. The fool who is angered and who thinks to triumph by using abusive language, is always vanquished by him whose words are patient.
----------
15 (224). Speak the truth; yield not to anger; give to him who begs, even though it be but a little: by living up to these three (rules of conduct) thou wilt go to the abode of the gods. 16. Re who is overcome by anger sees not what is good for himself; if you would free yourself of transmigration, speak not angry words.
----------
17. He who, having been angered, gives way to anger again, is sinful; but he who, having been angered, gives way to it no more, has won a mighty victory.
18 (223). Overcome anger by not being angered; overcome evil by good; overcome avarice by liberality; overcome falsehoods by truth.
19. He who is controlled and who leads a righteous life, by what could he be angered? The wise, who have perfect wisdom and who are emancipated, are without anger."
20. The elect associate always with him who is without anger, without wickedness; they who are wicked and given to anger (live alone), weighed down as if by a mountain.
21 (222). He who holds in rising anger, as he would guide a chariot on the road, him I call an accomplished driver; the vulgar crowd only hold the reins.
Chapter on Anger, the Twentieth.
----------
----------
XXI. THE TATHÂGATA.
1. In this world I know all, I have conquered all, I am free from all conditions (dharma), I have cast away everything; having put an end to all desires; perfectly emancipated, manifestly wise, by whom can I be taught?
2. I am the Tathâgata, the highest teacher; I am almighty, omniscient, and have obtained perfect wisdom (bodhi), which I fathomed by myself; incomparable and unequalled, by whom can I be taught?
3. I am the Arhat of the world; in this world I am unequalled ; (alone) among gods and men I have conquered the hosts of Mâra.
As there is none other like me, no one can be my master; all alone in the world I have found perfect and unsurpassable wisdom (samyaksambodhi).
4. I have found the cessation of the âsravas; like unto me are (all) Djinas, who have found this out. I have overcome all states of sinfulness, therefore am I a Djina? 5. As I am the conqueror of all that is like (sin), I the all-wise, perfectly enlightened one, who have crossed over from the region of desire, I who have attained nirvâṇa, I am not to be taught by any one in the world.
6. I am going to Vâraṇasi to sound the Drum of the Law for those who until now have known naught of it, to turn the Wheel of the Law that has been turned by no one in the world.
----------
7. The mighty Tathâgatas do instruct here by the law; they who have learnt the lam, there is no one that can look down on them.
8. Both gods and men delight in him who is steadfast, who is given to meditation, delighting in the peace of salvation, who has reached the end of corporeal existence: who is Perfectly Enlightened, glorious, and who is in the enjoyment of Wisdom (pradjnâ).
----------
9. They who have been Buddhas, the future Buddhas, and the present perfect Buddha, do liberate (mankind) from many sorrows.
To reverence the law, for all those who have been, who are, and who shall be, this is the great law of all Perfectly Enlightened ones.
He, therefore, who in this world cares about himself, and who wishes to arrive at greatness, let him remember the commandment of the Buddhas and reverence the law.
10. The man who has no faith in the doctrine of the Buddha is a fool; he will finally come to grief, as did the merchants with the Râkshasîs (female demons).
11. The man who has faith in the doctrine of the Buddha, and who is wise, will arrive at felicity in the other world, like the merchants (carried off) by "Might of a Cloud."
12. It is by perfect understanding of happiness and of the value of seclusion, and by living according to both of these, that the unequalled and incomparable Tathâgatas, the perfectly enlightened, dispel darkness, pass over to the other side, and acquire glory (among men).
13. Their minds all-powerful by having obtained what was to be obtained, perfectly free, having put an end to the âsravas, completely emancipated, mercifully longing to deliver (mankind), without wickedness or âsrava, they show the beings of the universe what is beneficial to them.
14-15. They who are on the summit of a mountain can see all men; in like manner they who are intelligent and free from sorrow are enabled to ascend above the paradise of the gods; and when they there have seen the subjection of man to birth and death and the sorrows by which he is afflicted, they open the doors of the immortal. Let those who will listen free themselves of all distrustfuness.
Chapter of the Tathâgata, the Twenty-First.
XXII THE HEARER.
1. To listen attentively, to live righteously, to give up a home for a state of happiness: to consent to give up all, these are alike praiseworthy in a Çramana.
2. The fool, who knows not, behaves as if he was immortal ; the wise man applies himself day and night to the holy law.
3-4 If a person:enters into a house wrapped in darkness, though he has eyes he cannot see objects that are (in it);
so likewise though a man is well born and has intelligence, if he hears not the law of vice and of virtue he cannot have wisdom.
5. Like a man who, having eyes and who bearing also a lamp, sees all objects, is he who has heard the law of vice and of virtue; he will become perfectly wise.
6. They who hearken acquire knowledge of the law; they who hearken turn away from sin; they who hearken give up all evil-doers; they who hearken find nirvâṇa.
7. If one has heard much but observes not the moral laws (çīla), he, because he disdains the moral laws, is not the best kind of hearer.
8. If one has heard little but does carefully observe the moral laws, he, because he honours the moral laws, is the best kind of hearer.
9. He who listens but little and he who observes not the moral laws, both of these, by reason of their disrespectfulness, lead not the best of lives.
10. He who has heard and he who carefully observes the moral laws, both of these, by reason of their reverence, lead the best of lives.
11. They who have heard much and who understand the law, who are wise and well composed, no one can scorn them, for they are like a jewel of gold of Djambudvipa.
12. He who describes me in his speech, having judged me (only) by outward appearance (lit. form), that man is held by lust and does not know me.
13. If one has a thorough knowledge of the inner (qualities of the Buddha), but has not seen the outer (perfections of his person), let him, having perceived the inner fruits, be candid in his language.
14. If one has seen the outer (perfections of the Buddha); but has not a knowledge of the inner (qualities of his doctrine), let him, having perceived the apparent fruit: be candid in his language.
15. If one has no knowledge of the inner (qualities), and has not perceived the outer (perfections of my person), a fool in utter darkness, let him be candid in his language.
16. If one has a thorough knowledge of the inner (qualities), and has seen the outer (perfections), a sage who knows the way to salvation, let him be candid in his language.
17. Though the ear hears much and the eye sees many things, all they who do hear and see the doctrine, do not believe.
18. Though a man has inwardly digested the well-spoken words he has heard, and has acquired the essence of meditation, if he acts corruptly his hearing and understanding will avail him nothing.
19. They who delight in the law taught by the elect, who follow it in body and speech, who delight in the society of the patient, who control their senses, they will obtain the reward of hearing and of understanding.
Chapter on "The Hearer," the Twenty-second.
XXIII. SELF (ATMA).
1. LEARN what has been well explained, associate only with Çramanas: (live) in seclusion and with only a single mat, and thy mind will be at rest.
2. Re who has but a single mat, one resting-place (the earth?), who is without indolence, who dwells alone in a forest, he will learn to control himself.
3 (103). He who conquers a thousand times a thousand men in battle, a greater conqueror than he is he who conquers himself.
4 (104). He who by continual control has conquered himself has by this one conquest gained so great a victory that that over the rest of mankind could not add to it.
5 (105). The Bhixu who has conquered through knowledge, Mâra and Brahmâ cannot defeat him, nor can a Deva or a Gandharva.
----------
6 (158). If one in the first place has done that which is right, he can afterwards discipline others to be like himself; if one in the first place has done that which is right, afterwards the wise man and those he shall have disciplined will be free from suffering.
7. If a man make others as he has made himself, then, being subdued and at rest, he can educate others to be happy.
8. If a man would make others as he has made himself, ah! let yourself be well subdued, for it is difficult to subdue one’s self.
9 (166). One must give up what is beneficial to the multitude for what is for one’s own good; when one has found that which is so greatly beneficial to himself, let him make his own welfare his chief concern.
----------
10. Self is the lord of self; what other lord could there be? The wise man who has become master of himself finds great profit.
11. Self is the lord of self; what other lord could there be? The wise man who has become master of himself finds theaw.
12. Self is the lord of self; what other lord could there be? The wise man who has become master of himself finds what is glorious.
----------
13. Self is tile lord of self; what other lord could there be? The wise man who has become master of himself finds happiness.
14. Self is the lord of self; what other lord could there be? The wise man who has become master of himself finds how to reach felicity.
15. Self is the lord of self; what other lord could there be? The wise man who has become master of himself will find joy for a long time in heaven.
----------
----------
16. Self is the lord of self; what other lord could there be? The wise man who has become master of himself is a beacon to his relatives.
17. Self is the lord of self; what other lord could there be? He who has become master of himself will find no pain in the midst of sorrow?
18. Self is the lord of self; what other lord could there be? He who has become master of himself cuts off all bonds.
19. Self is the lord of self; what other lord could there be? He who has become master of himself casts off all evil births.
20 (160). Self is the lord of self; what other lord could there be? He who has become master of himself finds a patron in himself. 21. Self is the lord of self; what other lord could there be? He who becomes master of himself drams nigh unto nirvâṇa itself (or unto the real destruction of or row).
----------
Chapter on "The Self," the Twenty-third.
XXIV. NUMBERS (or COMPARISONS).
1. It is better to speak one word of sense which brings one nigh unto peace, than to recite a hundred gâthâs which are without sense.
2 (102). I t is better to speak one word of the law which brings one nigh unto peace, than to recite a hundred gâthâs which are not of the law.
3 (110). He who lives a hundred years violating all his vows, a life of one single day is better if one observes all his vows.
----------
4 (112). He who lives a hundred years in laziness and slothfulness, a life of one single day is better if one exerts oneself to zealous application. 5 (111). He who lives a hundred years, his mind without aim or object, a life of one single day is better if one is wise and well composed.
6 (113). He who lives a hundred years without perceiving birth and dissolution, a life of one single day is better if one perceives birth and dissolution.
7. He who lives a hundred years without perceiving the ending of perception (vedanâ)? a life of one single day is better if one perceives the ending of perception.
8. He who lives a hundred years without perceiving the end of sin (Asrava), a life of one single day is better if one perceives the end of sin.
9 (114). He who lives a hundred years without perceiving the unchanging place: a life of one single day is better if one perceives the unchanging place (nirvâṇa).
----------
----------
----------
10. He who lives a hundred years without knowing the ideal knowledge that is hard (to arrive at)! a life of one single day is better if one knows the ideal knowledge that is hard (to arrive at).
11. He who lives a hundred years without perceiving what is most exalted: a life of one single day is better if one perceives what is most exalted. 12. He who lives a hundred years without perceiving the perfection of the holy (law), a life of one single day is I[( 04,1)] better if one perceives the perfection of the holy (lam, i.e., nirvâṇa)?
13. He who lives a hundred years without perceiving the perfect cessation of death, a life of one single day is better if one perceives the perfect cessation of death. 14. He who lives a hundred years without perceiving the most perfect amrita? a life of one single day is better if one perceives the most perfect amrita. 15. He who lives a hundred years without perceiving perfect passionlessness,3 a life of one single day is better if one perceives perfect passionlessness. 16. He who lives a hundred years without perceiving the perfect absence of passion: a life of one single day is better if one perceives the perfect absence of passion (raga)?
17 (107). If a man live for a hundred years in a forest, wholly relying on. the fire (Agni), and if he but for one single moment pays homage to a man who meditates on the self, this homage is greater than sacrifices for a hundred years.
18. He who month after month eats his food with a tip (of a blade) of kuça grass, is not worth the sixteenth part. of him who has faith in the Buddha.
19 (70). He who month after month eats his food with a tip (of a blade) of kuça grass, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who has faith in the holy law.
20. He who month after month eats his food with a tip (of a blade) of kuça grass, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who has faith in the church (Sangha).
----------
----------
21. He who month after month eats his food with a tip (of a blade) of kuça grass, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who is merciful to sentient creatures.
22. He who month after month eats his food with a tip (of a blade) of kuça grass, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who is merciful to animated creatures.
23. He who month after month eats his food with a tip (of a blade) of kuça grass, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who is merciful to beings (bhuta). 24. He who month after month eats his food with the tip (of a blade) of kuça grass, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who seeks to show kindness.
25. He who month after month eats his food with the tip (of a blade) of kuça grass, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who explains well the holy law.
26. He who for a hundred years makes a thousand sacrifices 2 each month, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who has faith in the Buddha.
27. He who for a hundred years makes a thousand sacrifices each month, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who has faith in the holy law.
28. He who for a hundred years makes a thousand sacrifices each month, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who has faith in the church (Sangha).
----------
----------
29. He who for a hundred years makes a thousand sacrifices each month, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who is merciful to sentient creatures.
30. He who for a hundred years makes a thousand sacrifices each month, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who is merciful to animated creatures. 31. He who for a hundred years makes a thousand sacrifices each month, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who is merciful to beings (bhuta). 32. He who for a hundred years makes a thousand sacrifices each month, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who seeks to show kindness.
----------
33. He who for a hundred years makes a thousand sacrifices each month, is not worth the sixteenth part of him who explains well the holy law.
34 (108). NO matter what sacrifice a man may offer in this world to acquire merit, it is not worth the quarter of doing homage to one who has a quieted and upright mind.
Chapter on "Numbers," the Twenty-fourth.
BOOK III . XXV. FRIENDSHIP.
1. THE wise man should not know him who is without faith, who is avaricious, who stirs up strife, and who slanders; lie should not associate with the wicked.
2. The wise man should have as his friends those who have faith, who speak pleasingly, who are attentive, virtuous, and wise; he should associate with the best of men.
3. Do not keep sinful persons as associates, stay not with the wicked; keep virtuous friends, stay with righteous men. If one associates with such as these, he becomes not sinful, but righteous.
4. Associate with them who have listened much, retained much, who reflect, who have faith and wisdom; if one but hearken here to the pleasing words (of these men), he will attain that which surpasses everything.
5. He who associates with what is low is contaminated by (their) sinfulness; he who associates with what is entirely fallen is held down to earth; associating with what is best brings one to righteousness. Keep then to those who will raise you to excellence.
6. If one associates with those best of men who are virtuous, dispassionate, who have the best of knowledge, though one be good: one will arrive at still greater excellence.
7. I t is with him who associates with the sinful as with the sweet kuça grass in which a man wrapped up some decayed fish; the kuça also became decayed.
8. I t is with him who associates with the virtuous as with the palâça leaves in which a man wrapped up some incense (tagara); the leaves also became scented?
9. If those who are not wicked associate with the wicked, there arises an inclination to do evil, which will grow into open acts of wickedness: by associating with those with whom one ought not to associate, one becomes sinful through their sinfuness.
10. As when an arrow has been dipped in poison, even where the poison has not come in contact with it, it is poisonous, so are those who are clothed in sin, that source of terror: keep not wicked friends.
11. As are one’s associates, as is what one holds fast to, so will one become in a short while: examine well, then, whom you associate with, as you would a basket of fruit.
12. Not associating with the unrighteous, the wise man associates with the righteous; ’by following this road the Bhixu will find the end of misery.
13 (64). If a fool for the whole of his life be associated with a wise man, he will no more perceive the law than does a spoon the taste of soup.
14 (65). If an intelligent man be associated for an instant with a wise man, he will perceive the law as does the tongue the taste of soup.
15. If a fool for the whole of his life be associated with a wise man, as he has no eyes he will not perceive the law.
16. If an intelligent man be only for an instant associated with a wise man, he, having eyes, will perceive the law.
17. If a fool for the whole of his life be associated with a wise man, he will not understand the law taught by the perfect Buddha.
18. If an intelligent man be only associated for an instant with a wise man, he will understand the law taught by the perfect Buddha.
19. A single significant word suffices for hi who is wise; all the teaching of the Buddha would not suffice for the fool.
20. He who is intelligent will with one word know a hundred; the fool with a thousand words will not know a single one.
21. The wise man cares not for fools, he makes not his friends of fools; for he who is fond of the society of fools is led down to hel.
22 (63). If a fool says, "I am a fool," he is wise in that knowledge; but the fool who thinks himself s wise man, he is called " a fool " (indeed).
23. When the fool doth praise and when the wise man doth scorn; the scorn of the wise man is just, but improper is the praise of the foo.
24 (207). He who associates with a fool is in misery, as if he were with an enemy;2 one ought not to associate with fools, neither ought one to listen to or see them; associating with the steadfast is happiness, like meeting again one’s kinsfolk.
25 (208). Therefore, as the moon keeps to the path of the constellations, so likewise keep (only) with them who are steadfast, erudite, who know what is best, virtuous, with the manners of the elect (Ariyas), pre-eminent, kind, and intelligent.
Chapter. on Friendship, the Twenty-fifth.
XXVI. NIRVÂṆA.
1. THE Bhixu who concentrates within himself all the faculties of his mind as the tortoise draws its body into its shell) attached to nothing, injuring no one, does naught to impede (the attaining of) nirvâṇa.
2 (184). Patience is the greatest penance; patience, the Buddha says, is the greatest nirvâṇa: he who is a priest and who injures others, who harms others, is not a Çramana (lit. one who practises virtue).
3 (133). Use no harsh words, for as one has been spoken to so will he answer; quarrelsome words bring sorrow, they receive their punishment.
4. He who sends forth (evil-sounding words) like a bronze vase that has been struck, will suffer for a long time, wandering about from birth to old age.
5 (134). He who does not send forth (evil-sounding words) like a bronze vase that has not been struck, occasioning no quarrels, he will find nirvâṇa.
6. Absence of disease is the best of possessions, contentedness the beat of riches, a true friend the best of friends, nirvâṇa the greatest happiness.
7 (203). All compound things (sanskâra) the greatest of pains, hunger the worst of diseases; if one has found this out, he has found the highest nirvâṇa.
8. Let one but consider the way to attain happiness and the way to go to perdition, and when he has thus formed an idea of sin, it will not be long ere he reaches nirvâṇa.
9. The way to attain happiness proceeds from a cause; the way to go to perdition has its cause; the way to nirvâṇa has its cause; they all have a cause.
10. The deer go chiefly to the woods, the birds fly into the air; he who devotes himself to the law goes to the nirvâṇa of the Arhat?
----------
----------
11. He who strives but feebly, who has little intelligence and no learning, will not find nirvâṇa, that destruction of all bonds.
----------
12 (369). The pilot of this boat makes it light; so if you cast away hatred and passions, you will reach nirvâṇa?
13. If what has formerly been born is not born, there will be produced that which is not born (the elementary); that which is not born (the elementary) not producing (compound things), there is an end to production itself.
14. He who perceives what is difficult to see (suffering), and who heeds not uncertain happiness,3 who understands the truth and has knowledge, who sees the nothingness of desires (trichnâ) and (worldly) joy, he who is like unto this has put an end to suffering.
15. Having cast off desires (trichnâ), having cast away passions, (I am) like unto a dried-up lake that flows no more; he who is like unto this puts an end to suffering.
16. He whose sensations (vedanâ) have become cool, whose perceptions (sandj) are suppressed, whose being (sanskâra) is at rest, whose consciousness (viññaṇa) has disappeared ; he who is like unto this puts an end to suffering.
17. He who has perceived what ought to be seen, who has heard what ought to be listened to, who has understood what ought to be understood, who knows perfectly what ought to be known perfectly; he who is like this puts an end to suffering: he who only longs for the thing which ought to be longed for (i.e., to be at rest), he who is like unto this puts an end to suffering.
----------
18 He who delights not in what is tangible, who is at peace, who casts off every passion; he who is like unto this puts an end to suffering. 19. From the source (ignorance) springs the commission (of sins); from the commission springs the binding (to their consequences); from the binding springs that which is not to be removed (transmigration); from that which is not to be removed springs going and coming; from going and coming springs suffering another death; from having to suffer another death springs another birth, and old age, disease, death, sorrow, misery, affliction, unhappiness, disagreeabilities are created; and in this manner does one bring on oneself a great amount of suffering? 20. There being no source (ignorance), there is no commission; there being no commission (of sins), there is no binding to (their consequences); there being no binding, there is not that which is not to be removed; there not being that which is not to be removed, there is no going and coming; there being no going and coming, there is no suffering another death; there beingx suffering another death, there is not another birth, and old age, disease, death, sorrow, misery, affliction, unhappiness, disagreeabilities are stopped; and in this way one puts an end to a great amount of suffering.
21. Bhixus, the uncreated, the invisible, the unmade, the elementary, the unproduced, exist (as well as) the created, the visible, the made, the conceivable, the compound, the produced; and there is an uninterrupted connection between the two. 22. Bhixus, if the untreated, the invisible, the unmade, the elementary, the unproduced was nonentity, I could not say that the result of their connection from cause to effect with the created, the visible, the made, the compound, the conceivable was final emancipation.
23. Bhixus, it is because of the real existence of the uncreated, the invisible, the elementary, the unproduced that I say that the result of their connection from cause to effect with the created, the visible, the made, the compound, the conceivable is final emancipation.
24. The impermanency of the created, the visible, the made, the produced, the compound, the great torment of subjection to old age, death, and ignorance, what proceeds from the cause of eating;4 (all this) is destroyed, and there is found no delight in it; this is the essential feature of final emancipation. Then there will be no doubts and scruples; all sources of suffering will be stopped: and one will have the happiness of the peace of the sanskâra?
25. Bhixus,’ it (nirvâṇa) is neither in earth, or in water, fire, or wind.
26. It (nirvâna) is not in a spiritual state (âyatana) in the immensity of space, nor in a spiritual state of infinite wisdom, nor in a spiritual state in the region of nothing, nor in a spiritual state in the region where there is no conception (and) where there is not no (conception); it is not in this world or in another world; it is not in either the sun or the moon: these (ideas) are not, I assert, the correct conception (of it).
27. Bhixus, as I say it does not exist with going and coming, it is what is not existence; as I do not say it exists where there is death, it is not to be born: this then is the end of suffering?
28. It (nirvâṇa) does not exist in either earth, water, fire, or wind;6 in it white (and the other colours) are not visible; in it there is not even darkness; in it the moon does not shine, nor does the sun send forth its rays.
29. He who is a Muni and a Brâhmana, and who is consequently wise, is delivered from the material (rûpa) and the immaterial (arûpa), and from all kinds of suffering.
30. He who has reached the end and is without fear, is without pride and without sin; having left behind the pains of existence, he has a body for the last time.
31. This is the chief (beatitude) of those who have reached the end, perfect and unsurpassable peace (amatam padam), the destruction of all characteristics, the perfection of perfect purity, the annihilation of death.
32. The Muni having cast off the sanskâra of existence (and also) like and unlike, by delighting in perfect composure he has broken the shell of the egg of existence and goes out (of the world).
33 (354). The greatest of gifts is the gift of the law; the greatest of delights is delight in the law; the greatest of strengths is the strength of patience; the greatest happiness is the destruction of desire (trichina).
Chapter on Nirvâṇa, the Twenty-sixth.
XXVII. SIGHT.
1 (252). IT is easier to see the faults of others than those of oneself; the faults of others are easily seen, for they are sifted like chaff, but one’s own faults are difficult to see.
It is like the cheat who shows the dice (of his adversary) and hides his own, calling attention to the shortcomings of the other (player), and continually thinking of accusing him; he is far from seeing what is right (dharma), and greatly increases is unhappy lot?
2 (244). Life is easy for an impudent, thieving boasting fellow, with filthy (instincts?) like a crow; who leads a life of sinfulness and impudicity.
3 (245). Life is hard for the man who is always seeking what is pure, who is disinterested, temperate, chaste, and modest.
4 (174). This world is in darkness; few there are who have [( 26,1)] spiritual insight? and who, like birds escaped from a net, go to enjoy the heavens.
5. The fool who is held in bondage by his body is wrapped in darkness; they who covet worldly goods consider all other things in this same (sinful) way.
6. Some think sentient beings are their own creators, some think that another (Isvara, &c.) made them; they who take as the truth what is not the truth can see nothing at all; not seeing that they are not even unanimous this point: they cannot perceive misery.
7. It enters not the mind of those beings who seek the pleasures of the senses that the misery they have until then seen (brought on themselves) is their own work; they do not understand that other like deeds will bring (misery also with them).
8. Those beings who are selfish, fond of selfishness, held in the bonds of selfishness, who are given to controversial opinions: will not escape from the orb of transmigration.
9. Know that the (births) that one has been subject to, and those that he will be subject to, all of these are wrapped in sinfulness (raga); they are subject to decay.
10. There are those who practise morality, the precepts, good behaviour, who lead a life of holiness (brahmachariya), and there is an extreme which is to devote oneself to asceticism.
11. And there is another extreme in which they say: "Desires are pure; though one has desires he is virtuous; desires are to be indulged in; desires have nothing sinful in them." These men are swallowed up by their desires. (The followers of) both these extreme (theories), frequenting mostly burial-places, are called " frequenters of burial-places " (sosâniko).
12. Neither of these extremes see (the cause of suffering), so part of them are filled with desires, and part of them are wildly running about; 1 they who can see perceive how full of desires they are, and how they run about.
13. They who can see, perceive that if these two extremes could but see, they would give up desires and cease running (after them); so they have no desires, and do not run about (after them). As they do not thus, as they think not thus (i.e., as the two extremes), as they are not held in this way, they have found the end of suffering.
14 (170). He who looks on the world as a bubble, who considers it as a mirage, the king of death will not see him.
15. He who looks on the body as a bubble, who considers it as a mirage, the king of death will not see him.
----------
16 (171). Look always at this body as at a beautiful royal chariot; the fool delights in it, the wise man has no fondness for it.
17. Look always at this body as at a beautiful royal chariot; the fool is deceived by it, the wise man is not deceived by it.
18. Look always at this body as at a beautiful royal chariot; the fool is brought low through it, like an old elephant sunk in the mud.
19. Look always at this body as sick and subject to decay, as a wounded man, as changing and impermanent.
20. Look at this body, ornamented with jewels, bracelets, and ear-rings, as diseased and subject to decay, as changing and impermanent.
21. The fool in his stupidity adorns his curls, paints his eyes with collour, and seeks not after the other world.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
22. The fool in his stupidity paints (his body) with colours, covers with jewels this corrupt body: and seeks not after the other world.
----------
----------
----------
23. The fool in his stupidity anoints this body with perfumes, rubs his feet with gerika, and seeks not after the other world. 24. He who is entirely devoted to desires, and who sees not the sinfulness of his devotion, is unable through his devotion to desires to cross the wide and eternal stream.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
25. He who has commenced by casting off the principal desires, and finally all of them, who looks neither to the I or the mine, crosses the until then impassable stream, and finishes with existence.
26 (344). He who having freed himself of the forest: being without the forest, runs to the forest, though he has freed himself of it; look at that miserable man who gives up freedom for bondage!
27. Look at that sinless being agreeable (to look at) in every limb, with a chariot well made (down to) the spokes, (see her) clothed in a white gown: and free yourself of the stream of bondage.
28 (188). The common of men, driven by fear, seek a refuge in mountains, forests, groves, sacrificial places, and in great trees.
29 (189). These are not the best of refuges, these are not the chief refuges, for a man who goes to them for a refuge is not freed from all suffering.
30 (190). He who seeks a refuge in the Buddha, the law (dharma), and the church (sangha), (he who sees with understanding) suffering, the production of suffering, the destruction of suffering:
31 (191). He who sees with understanding happiness, the way to nirvâna, the eightfold holy way and the four blessed truths:
32 (192). This is the chief refuge, this is the holy refuge; he who goes to this refuge becomes freed from all suffering.
33. He who perceives (mentally) what he sees, can perceive also the unseen with his sight; he who sees not the unseen does not perceive what he ought to see; ordinary sight and spiritual insight (vipassanâ) are by their nature as different as day and night, which never are at the same time.
34. With ordinary sight one cannot perceive (suffering, &C.); if one sees, he loses sight of form (rupa); with this sight (i.e., vipassanâ) one perceives not form; with ordinary sight one is without perceiving anything.
----------
35. He who perceives nothing, sees (but) form; he who perceives, sees not form; thus they who perceive not form have freed themselves of ordinary sight (i.e., have obtained vipassanâ).
36. When one perceives not suffering, then he considers but the self (i.e., he has ordinary sight); but when one distinguishes suffering, then he perceives not form.
37. He who is in the midst of darkness of repeated regeneration perceives not the suffering of the sanskâra, consequently he has but ordinary sight, and does not perceive how to put an end to form.
Chapter on Sight, the Twenty-seventh.
XXVIII. SIN.
1 (183). AVOID doing all wicked actions, practise most perfect virtue, thoroughly subdue your mind; this is the doctrine of the Buddha.
2. By charity one’s merit is increased, by being well controlled one makes no enemies: the virtuous man, having cast off sin, puts an end to misery (kleça) and obtains nirvâṇa.
3. If the wise man is mixed with fools and lives in their midst, he remains separate; as one naturally drinks milk rather than water, so does the wise man cast away evil-doers.
4. Seeing all the wickedness of the world," having seen the means to put an end to it, the elect take no pleasure in sin; the wicked cannot please the virtuous.
5. He (the elect) knows the sweetness of perfect peace, I the sweetness of solitude; free from disease: without sin, he drinks the sweetness of delighting in the law.
6. His mind having done away with sins (âsrava), and not held by fetters, having cast off virtue and vice; he (the elect) is without fear of the evil way.
7. Having given up a house, speaking well, teaching what is sin, the wise man tells what puts an end to (life);S with such as he ought men to associate. If one associates with such as he, one is not made sinful but virtuous.
8. He who is at rest and dispassionate, speaks with moderation and is without arrogance, he tears off all wickedness as does the wind the leaves of a tree.
9 (125). The fool who is angered against a pure and sinless person who is without hatred, the sin falls back on him like dust thrown up against the wind.
10. By acts of virtue one is virtuous, by acts of wickedness one is wicked; a man will perceive himself (the consequence) of that which he has repeatedly done.
11 (165). If by oneself evil has been done, oneself has all the suffering: if by oneself evil has been left undone, oneself is made pure: one cannot cleanse another; purity and impurity are one’s own doings.
12. The sins that one has committed accumulate until they crush the fool, as a diamond pierces a precious stone.
13. As the traveller who can see (avoids) the dangers, so does the wise man avoid the sins of the life in this world?
14 (123). As the merchant who has great -treasures and few companions avoids dangerous roads, as he who loves life avoids poison, so let the sage avoid sinfulnes.
15 (124). He who has no wound in his hand can take poison in his hand, for poison affects not him who has no wound; so likewise there is no evil for him who does not commit evil.
16 (163). Deeds that are hurtful to oneself and deeds that are wrong are easy to do; deeds that are beneficial and that bring happiness, they are very difficult to do.
17. I t is easy for the righteous to do right, it is difficult for the righteous to do evil; it is easy for the wicked to do evil, it is difficult for the elect (ariya) to do evil.
18 (69). As long as an evil deed has not ripened, the fool thinks that it is sweet; when an evil deed has ripened, then he perceives that it is burning.
19 (119). As long as an evil deed has not ripened, one thinks that it is right; when an evil deed has ripened, then one sees that it is evil.
20 (120). As long as a good deed has not ripened, good seems like evil; when a good deed has ripened, then one perceives it is good.
21 (117). He who has laid up for himself the miseries of sin will find no joy; even if a man has done-evil a hundred times, let him not do it again.
22. He who has laid up for himself the felicity of virtue will find joy; if a man had done what is virtuous, let him do it again.
23 (116). The mind (of that man) delights in evil who does what is right slothfully; keeping his mind away from evil, he must hasten towards what is
24. He who has done even a little evil experiences in this world and in the other great ruin and a great deal of suffering; it is like poison that has entered into the internal parts?
25. He who has done even a little good finds in this world and in the other happiness and great profit; it is like a seed that has well taken root.
26 (137). He who inflicts pain on one who is sinless, who is angered with one who is without anger, will speedily arrive himself at one of these ten states. 27 (138). He will experience no end of pain (vedanâ), or he will be torn limb from limb, or he will experience a heavy sensation of pain: or his mind will become deranged:
28 (139). Or he will be separated from his relatives, or he will lose his wealth, or he will have some trouble with the king: or no end of disagreeable things:
----------
29 (140). Or yet, again, his home will be destroyed by a great fire; and when the senseless man has finished with this body he will go to hell.
30. He who has done what is evil cannot free himself of it; he may have done it long ago or afar off: he may have done it in solitude, but he cannot cast it off, and when it has ripened he cannot cast it off.
31. He who has done what is right is free of fear; he may have done it long ago or afar off, he may have done it in solitude; he is without fear, and when it (i.e., his good deed) has ripened he is without fear.
32. He who has done what is evil brings grief (on himself); though he has done it long ago or afar off, it brings sorrow; he may have done it in solitude, it brings sorrow; and when it has ripened it brings him sorrow. 33. When one has seen one’s evil deeds, one has sorrow here and one will have sorrow in the other world; the evil-doer has sorrow in both places; he mourns and will greatly sorrow.
34. He who has done what is right is made happy; (though) he has done it long ago and afar off, he is made happy; he may have done it in solitude, (but) he is made happy; and when it has ripened it brings him joy.
----------
35 (16). When one has seen one’s righteous deeds, one rejoices here and will also rejoice in the other (world); he who has done what is right rejoices in both places; he is made glad, he will be exceedingly joyful.
36. He who has done what is evil is made to suffer; though he has done it long ago, though he has done it afar off, he is made to suffer; though he has done it in solitude, he is made to suffer; and when it has ripened it brings him suffering. 37 (17). When one has seen one’s evil deeds: one suffers in this (world); one will suffer in the next (world); the evil-doer suffers in both; he suffers and he will greatly suffer.
38. He who has done what is right is made happy; (though) he has done it long ago, (though) he has done it afar off, he is made happy; though he has done it in solitude he is made happy; and when it has ripened he is made happy. 39 (18). When one has seen one’s righteous deeds one rejoices here and will rejoice in the other world; he who has done what is right rejoices in both places; he is made glad, he will be made exceedingly joyful.
----------
40. He who has done evil and has not done what was right, who strays away from the law, who is an unbeliever, the wicked man is in fear of death, like one on a great river in a leaky (lit. bad) boat.
41. He who has been virtuous and has done what is right, who follows the doctrines of the holy men of old: he has never any fear of death, like one in a strong boat which can reach the other shore?
Chapter on Sin, the Twenty-eighth.
XXIX DAY AND NIGHT.
1. As long as the sun has not risen the glow-worm doth shine; when the sun has risen he is without brightness, and becomes as he formerly was.
2. As long as the Tathâgata had not appeared the sophists did shine; when the perfectly Enlightened One appeared in the world, teachers and disciples shined no more.
3 (11). He who considers that which is not precious as precious: and who thinks that what is precious is not precious, his whole understanding entirely subverted, he will not find what is precious.
4 (12). He who perceives that what is not precious is not precious, and that what is precious is precious, his whole understanding properly arranged, he will find what is precious.
5. They who are again and again adding to their bonds through their fondness for these (theories), and giving ear to them, flitting about in the orb of transmigration, they like the moths fall into the fire?
6. When one in this world has any kind of uncertainty about the enjoyment here (of the maturity of one’s actions) or the enjoyment hereafter, if he is living a life of holiness (brahmachariya), when he has thought on it, (his doubts) will be entirely removed.
7 (9). He whose (mind) is like troubled water, and who wears the saffron-coloured gown, being without restraint, he is not worthy of the saffron-coloured gown.
8 (10). He who has cast off all impurities, whose mind is attentive to the moral laws, being thus restrained, he is worthy of the saffron-coloured gown. 9. The artful, deceitful, and avaricious man, notwithstanding the colour (of his gown), his appearance, and what he may say, has not become the best of men.
10. He who has cut down these three characteristics (of the sinner) l as he would the top of a tla-tree, intelligent and cleansed of sins, he is called the best of men.
----------
11. He who in this world, not being well controlled, deceitfully, for some interested motive, produces the incorrect idea that he is well controlled by the general appearance of his garb (lit. colour and person), no confidence must be placed in him.
12. As deceiving as the colour of brass, like iron coated over with gold is he whose inside is poison, and whose outward manner is that of the elect, and who goes about in this world with a great company.
13 (325). He who is given to gourmandising, to sleeping, to going about day and night seeking for a place to lie down in, like a great hog (wallowing) in the mire, this man will be reborn again and again.
14. The man who is always thoughtful, who knows how to be always moderate in his food, he is subject to but little suffering: and his slow digestion prolongs his life?
15 (7). He whose senses are not controlled, who does not know how to be moderate in his food, who is thoughtless and idle, who lives seeking what pleases (the eye): is overthrown by his passions as is a weak tree by the wind.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
16 (8). He whose senses are well controlled, who knows how to be moderate in his food, who remembers everything and is diligent, who seeks not after what pleases (the eye), is not disturbed by passions, like a mountain unshaken by the wind.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
17 (99). The forest is delightful, where man finds no delight; there the passionless finds delight, for he seeks not after pleasures.
18 (98). In a forest or in a village, on a mountain top or in a valley: in whatever part of the earth an Ariya dwells, that (spot) is agreeable.
19 (304). The holy shine from afar off, like the snowy mountains ; the wicked shine not, even though near, like arrows shot in intense darkness.
20. If one associates with the wise, with the holy whose minds are turned to virtue, he obtains great profit, and acquires profound wisdom.
21 (320). As the elephant in battle (is patient though) pierced by the arrows shot from the bows, so likewise be patient under the unkind words of the crowd.
----------
22. He who makes a cave his abode: who has nothing to do with the unrighteous, who suppresses all contingencies: and who lives on refuse (?),5 that man is holy.
23. Having killed father and mother and two holy kings, having conquered their kingdoms with its inhabitants a man will be pure. 24 (92). He who is without concupiscence, who is always modest. e in his food, the field of whose activity is the void, the uncharacteristic, and solitude, his way is difficult to perceive, like, that of birds in the ether.
25 (93). He who is without concupiscence, who is always moderate in his food, the field of whose activity is the void, the uncharacteristic, and solitude, his track is difficult to perceive like the track of birds in the ether.
----------
----------
26. He who is without concupiscence, who is always moderate in his food, the field of whose activity is the void, the uncharacteristic, and continual contemplation (dhyâna), his way is difficult to perceive, like the track of birds in the ether. 27. He who is without concupiscence, who is always moderate in his food, the field of whose activity is the void, the uncharacteristic, and continual contemplation, his track is difficult to perceive, like the track of birds in the ether. 28, 29. (Repetitions of verses 24 and 25.) 30. He who is not held to this shore, who has found out the cessation of the âsravas, the field of whose activity is the void, the uncharacteristic, and solitude, his way is difficult to perceive, like the track of birds in the ether.
31. He who is not held to this shore, who has found out the cessation of the Âsravas, the field of whose activity is the void, the uncharacteristic, and solitude, his track is difficult to perceive, like the track of birds in the ether.
----------
32. He who is not held to this shore, who has found out the cessation of the Âsravas, the field of whose activity is the void, the uncharacteristic, and continual contemplation, his way is difficult to perceive, like the track of birds in the ether. 33. He who is not held to this shore, who has found out the cessation of the âsravas, the field of whose activity is the void, the uncharacteristic, and continual meditation, his way is difficult to perceive, like the track of birds in the ether.
34, 35. (Repetitions of verses 32 and 33.)
36 (85). The common of mortals run along this shore; few there are among men who go to the other shore.
37 (86). Those beings who walk in the way of the law that has been well taught, reach the other shore of the great sea of birth and death, that is difficult to cross.
38. He who frees himself by watchfulness,3 who leaves in the past all sorrows, one who thus delivers himself of all his bonds, will know no affliction whatever.
39. When one passes beyond the road of terror and what accompanies it? and is out of the way of precipices (i.e., falling into the evil way), freed of all bonds and ties, he has destroyed the poison of the passions.
40. There is no swamp like desire (trichnâ); there is nothing as pernicious as hatred; there is no net like ignorance; there is no torrent like covetousness.
41. The Çramana who has reached the other shore is like the trackless firmament; "he fool delights in his occupations, and the Tathâgata is not his occupation. The fool is led through (attachment); the wise man destroys all attachment.
42. The wise man destroys all attachments of gods and men, and by being free from all attachment he becomes emancipated from all suffering.
43. From attachment proceeds existence; without attachment there is no existence: to the acquisition of the knowledge of these two ways of existence and not existence and the way to be perfectly delivered of attachment, let the wise man apply himself.
44. He who has done that which is wrong, suffers for it, and when hereafter he will be in the evil way he will suffer; he who has done that which is right, is made happy, and when hereafter he will be in the happy way he will be happy.
45. It is better in both (this world and the other) if one has not done evil, for he who does it will suffer; it is good for one to do what is right, for he will have no affliction.
46. The wise man and the fool being mixed together, it is not possible to distinguish them when they have not spoken; but let one of them impart (the way) to the perfection of peace (nirvâṇa), then he is known by his speech (to be a sage).
47. The expounding (of the law) is the standard of the Rischi (i.e., Bhagavat); the law being the standard of the Rischi, and the law by his explanations being made brilliant, let the Rischi raise on high his standard.
48 (227). If one has not spoken he is blamed; if one has spoken much he is blamed; he who speaks slowly is blamed: there is no one in the world who is not blamed.
49 (228). A man who is only to be blamed, or one who is only to be praised, there is none such; there never has been, there never will be. 50. They who preoccupy not themselves about existence, who have put an end to all return of suffering from attachment, and are delivered of existence, gods and men cannot understand their purpose?
51 (229, 230). He who is praised by those who have discriminative knowledge, as being faithful, virtuous, and of great wisdom, there is no one who can blame him; he is like a jewel of Djambudvipa gold.
----------
52 (81). As mountains and rocks are unshaken by the wind, so likewise the wise man is unmoved by praise or blame. 53. The earnest man without any root in the earth, without a leaf (of sinfulness) on any branch, delivered from bondage, there is no one who can blame him.
----------
----------
54 (179). He who does not suffer from conquest, whom the world cannot conquer in the least, the Buddha, the field of whose activity is infinite, there is no being by whose steps he is guided. (16)]55. He who does not suffer from conquest, whom the world cannot conquer in the least, the Buddha, whose might is infinite, there is no being by whose steps he is guided.
56 (180). He to whom the allurements of desires and the regions of desire have no delight, the Buddha, the field of whose activity is infinite, there is no being by whose steps he is guided.
----------
57. He to whom the allurements of desires and the region of desire have no delight, the Buddha, whose might is infinite, there is no being by whose steps he is guided.
58. He who is illumined by perfect understanding, who having fathomed everything abides in nothing, who is delivered of all attachments, of form, and consciousness (sandjâ), who has got rid of the four yogas; he has put an end to birth.
59 (348). Having cast off what is before, having cast off what is behind, having cast off what is in the middle, one goes to the other shore of existence; when the mind is free from everything, one will not be subject to birth and death.
Chapter of "Day and Night," the Twenty-ninth.
XXX HAPPINESS.
1 (201). FROM victory proceeds rancour; the defeated foe is in misery: if one casts off victory and defeat he will find the happiness of peace.
2. He who causes misery to others in seeking for his own welfare brings witout distinction misery on friends and foes.
3 (131). Re who seeking happiness persecutes and punishes other beings also seeking for happiness, will not find happiness in the other world.
4 (132). He who seeking happiness does not persecute and punish beings seeking for happiness, will find happiness in the other world.
5 (169). Perform carefully the precepts of the law; abstain from all evil deeds: he who keeps the law finds happiness in this world and in the other. 6. The observance of the law brings happiness; he who keeps the law is guarded by the law; he who keeps the law goes not on the evil way; for this is the observance of the law beneficial.
7. He who keeps the law is sheltered by the law, as is one in summer by a large umbrella; he who keeps the law goes not on the evil way, for this reason is the observance of the law beneficial. 8. The careless man who observes not the law, no matter who he may be, goes to damnation; he who keeps not the law is as surely destroyed as is the black snake that one has caught by the middle. 9. The rewards of the righteous and of the unrighteous are not the same; the unrighteous go to hell, the righteous find the way to happiness.
----------
----------
10-11. When one is charitable and when one gives battle, if well understood these (operations) are primarily alike;l as I have said (or it has been said) that .being charitable and fighting are alike, be careful in both cases and rely not on what is bad. A single man well equipped can conquer (a legion) of badly equipped rabble (?),2 so likewise if one gives through faith, even though a little, he will thereby find happiness in the other world.
12. He who has been victorious in a hundred battles, and who has overcome all his enemies, is not so great a conqueror, I declare, as he who gives with a pure heart.
13. The reward of virtue is happiness; he who has made this his goal will speedily find perfect rest and nirvâṇa?
14. There is nothing by which men can harm them who are virtuous; they from the world of the gods and of Mâra are not able to hurt them.
15. He who, to put an end to misery, applies himself diligently to the acquirement of righteousness and knowledge, shall enjoy (it) through supernatural sight (vipaçyana).
16. He who delights in the law with a truly believing mind, finds happiness; the sage always delights in the law that has been taught by the elect.
17, 18. They whose minds delight in contemplation (dhyana)? who delight in no created thing, who delight in the four modes of arranging the memory: in the seven branches of the Bodhi, in the four bases of performing miracles: in the eightfold way, they wear the garment of the law and are happy in living on alms.
----------
19. ’They move about in peace on mountains and in forests; they are happy in finding happiness, and leave sorrow behind in the perception of the law (nirvâṇa). He has left behind hatred and fear, and has crossed over from worldly existence.
20. To hear the law, to perceive the law, and to delight in seclusion, is happiness; to all living beings in the world to comprehend the complete cessation of death is happiness.
21. To abandon desires, to be free of the passions of the world, is happiness; to subdue the selfish thought of " I " is the greatest happiness.
22 (333). To be virtuous unto old age is happiness; to live in perfect faith is happiness; to delight in words of sense is happiness; to do no evil is’ happiness.
23 (332). Happy in this world is he who honours his father: so likewise he who honours his mother is happy; happy in this world he who honours Çramanas, so likewise he who honours Brâhmanas is happy.
24 (194). The arising of a Buddha is happiness, the teaching of the law is happiness, the harmony of the clergy is happiness, the devotion (tapas) of those who are united is happiness.
25. ’Tis happiness to see a virtuous man; to see one who has heard much is happiness; to see Arhats who are delivered from existence is happiness.
26. ’Tis happiness to reach the shore o( the river of happiness ; happy the being who has the triumph of the law (i.e., who has attained purity); to obtain wisdom is happiness ; to put an end to selfishness is happiness.
27. To see the elect is happiness; to associate with the righteous is happiness; not to see fools is always happiness. 28 (207). ’Tis as great suffering to be in the company of fools as in that of enemies; he who associates with fools will repent him of it for a long time.
----------
29 (193). An omniscient person is hard to find; he does not appear everywhere: ’tis happiness to associate with the steadfast, like unto meeting one’s kinsmen; wherever such a steadfast person is born, that people finds happiness.
30. The Brâhmanas who have left sorrow behind, find most perfect happiness; he who has divested himself of desires, who is without âsravas, is perfectly free.
31. They who have destroyed all desires, who have cleansed their hearts of all cankers: their minds bring them peace, and in peace there is happiness.
32. If the steadfast man seeks for great happiness, and would give up little happiness, let him cast away the little happiness and look well to the great one.
33. Worldly happiness and happiness in the region of the gods is not worth the sixteenth part of the happiness (resulting) from the destruction of desires.
34. If one has been miserable under the weight of his burden: ’tis happiness to cast it down; if one has cast down his heavy load, he will not in future take up another.
35. He who has put an end to all attachment, who has cast away all affection, who perfectly understands all the skandhas, will not be subject to any subsequent existence.
36. To associate with those who bring one great profit is happiness; to be virtuous in the different circumstances of life is happiness; to be satisfied with no matter how mean a pittance is happiness; to put an end to all suffering is happiness.
37. By beating with a hammer the iron that has been burnt with fire it is finally destroyed; in like manner is the unwise man done away with.
38. He who, having forded the miry stream of desire, has found the unchanging place (amatam padam, nirvâna), there is nothing that will hold back that being who has (found) perfect emancipation.
39. He whom nothing agitates, who has left existence and not existence, free of terror, happy and without sorrow, even the gods on seeing (his happiness) cannot comprehend its (extent).
40. In this world to hear much of the law and to comprehend it, nothing is so great a happiness! Man is filled with love for his body, and see how little it takes to destroy it!
----------
42. He who has understood that there is nothing commendable in the human condition, will have the happiness of never being subject to birth; man is filled with love for his body, and see how little it takes to destroy it!
----------
43. While it is misery to be in subjection to another, to be one’s own master is great happiness; ’tis hard to cast off attachment, and to put an end to the source of all troubles.
44 (199). Ah! let us live exceedingly happy, living without greed among men who are greedy, without greed in the midst of the greedy.
----------
45 (198). Ah! let us live exceedingly happy, living without disease among men afflicted by diseases, without disease in midst of disease.
46. Ah! let us live exceedingly happy, living without enmity amidst men who are inimical, without enmity among the inimical. 47. Ah! let us live exceedingly happy, living without cruel thoughts amidst men who have cruel thoughts, without cruelty among the cruel.
48. Ah! let us live exceedingly happy, living without hatred amidst men who hate, without hatred among haters. 49. Ah! let us live exceedingly happy; though Mithilâ burns, nothing of mine does burn, for I have nothing?
----------
50 (200). Ah! let us live exceedingly happy; though there be nothing to call our own, we shall feed on happiness like the shining gods?
51. Ah! let us live exceedingly happy, relying on nothing perishable; and though there be nothing to call our own, we shall feed on happiness.
52. When one meets with the consequences of attachment (upadana) one must suffer; when there is no attachment there is nothing to meet which can cause suffering; he who has finished with both the one and the other (attachment and its consequences) and is happy, will not have to endure affliction in either forest or hamet.
53. In this world the holy man is neither elated or depressed by joy or sorrow; the steadfast are not made vain by the objects of desire; the holy man forsakes everything.
Chapter on happiness, the Thirtieth.
BOOK IV XXXI. THE MIND
1 (35). IT is good to control the mind, which is difficult to hold, unstable, and which goes where it pleases: with a controlled mind one acquires happiness.
2 (34). To escape from the abode of Mars one is filled with trembling, like a fish taken from its watery abode and thrown on dry land.
3. Like one deprived of the light of the sun, one’s mind wanders about; they who are truly wise hold it in, as one does an elephant with an iron hook.
4. I t is not "do that which .is of no profit to oneself, which is not worth a thought, which is of no import; but continually to control your mind" - that is what I say.
5 (326). Formerly this mind (of mine) ran about as it wanted, as suited its fancy; now it is orderly, and I hold it in as does the man with a hook’ a maddened elephant.
6 (153). Maker of the house, I have sought until now to find thee: going through the revolution of countless existences, and subject to the pain of ever-recurring birth.
7 (154). Maker of the house, having found thee out, and the great beams of the house (kleça) being destroyed, and all the rafters (trichnâ) L)3 hewn down, thou shalt not hereafter make a house (for me).*
8 (33). When one, having freed the mind of the sanskâra, would put an end to it (birth), the mind being uncertain, changeable, flighty, and hard to control, he must straighten it by application as the fletcher straightens (his arrows) with fire.
9. He who, thinking not of the body, lives in a cave, and wanders about all alone, does conquer this flighty mind, and is delivered of the greatest of terrors.
10 (42). He whose mind is evilly inclined will bring suffering on himself, as will not a hater by hatred, as will not an enemy to an enemy.
11 (43). He whose mind is virtuously inclined will bring happiness on himself, as cannot bring father, mother, and the other relatives.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
12. As into the badly-covered house pours the rain, so likewise is the unmeditative mind overwhelmed by lust.
13. As into the badly-covered house pours the rain, so likewise is the unmeditative mind overwhelmed by passions. 14 (14). As into the well-covered house drops not the rain, so the meditative mind keeps out the rising passions.
15. As into the badly-covered house pours the rain, so is the unmeditative mind overwhelmed by ignorance (tamas). 16. As into the well-covered house drops not the rain, so the meditative mind keeps out rising ignorance.
17. As into the badly-covered house pours the rain, so is the unmeditative mind overwhelmed by selfishness. 18. As into the well-covered house drops not the rain, so the meditative mind keeps out rising selfishness. 19. As into the badly-covered house pours the rain, so is the unmeditative mind overwhelmed by affections?
20. As into the well-covered house drops not the rain, so the meditative mind keeps out rising affections. 21. As into the badly-covered house pours the rain, so is the unmeditative mind overwhelmed by desires.
22. As into the well-covered house drops not the rain, so the meditative mind keeps out rising desires.
23 (1). The mind is the leader of its faculties (dharma); the mind is swift; the mind is the ruler: if one has either spoken or acted with evil intent, he will experience suffering, as he whose head was cut off by a wheel.
24 (2). The mind is the leader of its facuties;s the mind is swift; the mind is the ruler: if one has either spoken or acted with pure intent, lie will find happiness (as surely) as one’s shadow follows one’s track. 25. He who is greatly given to wrangling, whose mind is sinful, though he may seek the means to do so, cannot well understand what has been well explained?
26. They who are angered or quarrelsome, or whose minds are without faith, cannot understand the blessed law taught by the perfect Buddha.
27. They who, their minds without impurity and with anger perfectly subdued, have cast off all evil-mindedness, they by this means can understand what is well explained.
----------
28. He whose mind is not steadfast cannot understand the holy law; he whose faith is fickle cannot acquire perfect wisdom.
29 (339). He who, given up to the indulgence of pleasure, is held in the stream of the thirty-six evil ideas, will be swept away by the flood of his passions.
30. Thoughts of pleasure and subjection to the senses pursue the mind, demolishing the weak man’s bright lot; like birds do the fruits on a tree.
31 (371). Delight not thy mind in seeking what is dazzling; keep thy mind diligent and pure, that thou mayest not for thy wicked deeds, being born in hell, have to weep on swallowing the iron ball.
32 (280). He who remains seated when it is time to rise, who, though strong and young, sits slothfully at home, who is always careless in his thoughts, will not find the road to wisdom.
33. They who, though understanding what is trifling (i.e., desires), and understanding (the importance of) passionlessness, have their innermost mind still disturbed,’ have not thorough understanding; their minds are deceived, and they wander about (in the orb of transmigration) again and again.
34. They whose memory is perfectly developed, who are diligent, who discriminate, the wise, they have understanding, and by means of their intellect. they cast away every one of the errors in the interior of the mind.
35 (40). He who has discerned that this body is like a vase, having by his thoughts made this (idea) as lasting as a citadel, fights Mâra with wisdom as a weapon; ,and having overcome him, he will keep to a houseless state? 36. He who has discerned that this world is like a vase (i.e., empty), having by his thoughts made this (idea) as lasting as a citadel, fights Mâra with wisdom as a weapon; and having overcome him, he will keep to a houseless state.
37. He who has discerned that this body is like froth, having by his thoughts made this (idea) as lasting as a citadel, fights Mâra with wisdom as a weapon; and having overcome him, he will keep to a houseless state.
----------
38. He who has discerned that this world is like froth, having by his thoughts made this (idea) as lasting as a citadel, fights Mâra with wisdom as a weapon; and having overcome him, he will keep to a houseless state.
39 (89). He whose mind is devoted to meditating on the seven branches of the bodhi, who is free from all attachment (upadana), who has cast off attachment, is cleansed of the stains of misery, and goes beyond sorrow (parinibbuta) in this world.
40. He who watches over his mind as does the yak over the end of its tail, is merciful to all creatures, and his happiness will not grow less (in this o r l d ) .
41. He whose mind is well composed (not given to anger), delights in living alone (like) the largest of elephants, the elephant with goodly tuskse
42. He whose mind knows no harm, who is kind to all creatures (bhuta), who is merciful to creatures, there never arises any ill feeling in him? 43. He who knows no evil thoughts, who is kind to all creatures, who is merciful to all living beings, there never arises any ill feeling in him. 44. He who knows no evil thoughts, who is kind to creatures, who shows mercy to all sentient beings, there never arises any ill feeling in him. 45. (Repetition of verse.) 46. He who is kind to all his acquaintances, to all his friends, and to all creatures, and who entertains a spirit of mercy, will greatly increase his happiness.
----------
----------
47. If one has but thoughts devoid of cruelty for living beings, and shows mercy, he is by this fact virtuous; if one shows a compassionate heart to all sentient beings, he will attain such merit as is acquired by the elect (ariya).
48. The man who with a joyous mind, without faintheartedness, observes the laws of virtue: will arrive at perfection and happiness.
49. Emancipated by perfect knowledge, he is safe and at rest; his mind being at rest, the actions of his body and his words are quiet.
50. Thus, by having the mind fixed on one point, one obtains perfect comprehension of the law, but it is not by having cymbals on the five limbs that one will find joy.
51. They whose minds delight in meditation find no enjoyment in desires; he who is shielded from the smallest affliction will enjoy blissful slumber.
52. They whose minds delight in meditation find no enjoyment in desires; he who is troubled by no affliction whatever will find great joy.
53. He whose mind, like a rock, remains without being moved, who in the midst of passions is without passions, in the midst of anger is without anger, with a mind such as this it is not possible to experience suffering.
54 (185). Speak no abuse, do no harm, be firm in the observance of the Pratimoxa, know how to be moderate in your food, take up your abode in a remote forest, and you will find peace of mind in spiritual insight (vipaçyana); this is the doctrine of the Buddha.
55. He who possesses a correct estimation of the mind, who appreciates the flavour of perfect solitude, protected by the earnestness of his meditative mind, he enjoys the pleasure of being without anything (that causes suffering).
56. He whose attentive mind delights in the truth and adheres to the (four) truths, who always walks in the way with his body, he is safe in speech and in mind,2 and, casting off sorrow, he will experience no more suffering.
57. He whose mind is not guarded, who is under the rule of false theories, subdued by sleep and laziness, he will fall into the power of Mâra.
58. His mind therefore guarded, led by orthodox opinions, with perfect understanding in his way of doing: perfectly comprehending birth and decay, the Bhixu, subduing sleep and laziness, has found the way to put an end to suffering.
59. He who is pure is in safety; he whose mind is subdued and perfectly controlled is happy; all those who have been led astray by brutish instincts will go to hell.
60. He who is pure is in safety; he whose mind is subdued and perfectly controlled is happy; all those who have been led astray by brutish instincts will exist (hereafter) among beasts.
61. He who is pure is in safety; he whose mind is subdued and perfectly controlled is happy; all those who have been led astray by brutish instincts will exist (hereafter) among pretas.
62. He who is pure is in safety; he whose mind is subdued and perfectly controlled is happy; all those who are guarded against brutish instincts will find joy among men.
63. He who is pure is in safety; he whose mind is subdued and perfectly controlled is happy; all those who are guarded against brutish instincts will find joy in heaven.
64. He who is pure is in safety; he whose mind is subdued and perfectly controlled is happy; all those who are guarded against brutish instincts will find nirvâṇa?
Chapter on the Mind, the Thirty-first.
XXXIT THE BHIXU.
1. A BHIXU who is satisfied with what alms are given him, and who frets not about what is given to others, who is protected by continual passionlessness and reflection, him the gods do delight in.
2. A Bhixu who is satisfied with what alms are given him, and who frets not about what is given to others, who is protected (by passionlessness and reflection), and in whom the gods delight, in such a one there is no desire for honours, riches, and fame.
3. A Bhixu who has cast off all desires, is free from passions, though having before him (the objects of desire); the steadfast one, who is without selfishness and is .controlled, ought not to hold intercourse with others.
4. Hurt by the words of uncontrolled men, and listening to the words of the ill-natured, the Bhixu is without anger what ere occurs, like the elephant pierced by arrows on the battlefield. 5. Hurt by words of uncontrolled men, and listening to the words of the ill-natured, the Bhixu is equally composed what ere occurs, like the elephant pierced by arrows on the battlefield.
6. Not exercising any handicraft for the gratification of the self, his senses under control, perfectly emancipated, without fondness for a home, without selfishness, having cast off desires and living all alone, that man is a Bhixu .
7 (375). Associating only with men whose lives are pure and who are without slothfulness, observing the different prescriptions,3 one will learn the necessary rules to follow in life (to acquire nirvâṇa).
8 (362). He who controls his hands, who controls his feet, who controls his speech, who controls his -senses, who finds all his pleasure in solitude, who is contented, him I call a Bhixu.
9 (364). The Bhixu who finds perfect joy in the law, who delights in the law, who meditates on the law, who bears in mind the law, will never depart from the law.
10 (373). The Bhixu having entered an empty abode and seeing the innermost (part of the law), will experience divine joy on perceiving the law rightly.
11. As soon as he has rightly understood the creation and destruction of the skandhas, he will find joy and ravishment; the Bhixu filled with joy will find the way to put an end to suffering.
12. As a rocky mountain is unshaken by the wind, so likewise the Bhixu who has put an end to passions is immovable.
13. As a rocky mountain is unshaken by the wind, so likewise the Bhixu who has put an end to ignorance is immovable.
14. As a rocky mountain is unshaken by the wind, so likewise the Bhixu who has put an end to selfishness is immovable.
15. As a rocky mountain is unshaken by the wind, so likewise the Bhixu who has put an end to lust is immovable.
16. As a rocky mountain is unshaken by the wind, so likewise the Bhixu who has put an end to affection is
17. He who is without worldly goods, who cares not for self, for whom there is no affliction in anything, he is called a Bhixu.
18. They who only beg of others must not be considered as Bhixus; they who are attached to the ways of the world must not be considered as Bhixus.
19. He who has cast off virtue and vice: who leads a life of holiness, who lives away from the society of men, he is called a Bhixu.
20. The Bhixu who is kind, who has perfect faith in the teaching of the Buddha, will find the perfection of peace (amatam padam), of which one can never weary.
21. The Bhixu who is kind, who has perfect faith in the teaching of the Buddha, will find the perfection of peace, the peace from the sanskâra (body).
22. The Bhixu who is kind, who has perfect faith in the teaching of the Buddha, will arrive by degrees at the complete destruction of all attachment. 23. The Bhixu who is kind, who has perfect faith in the teaching of the Buddha, will pull himself out of the evil way, as the elephant does himself out of the mire. 24. The Bhixu who is kind, who has perfect faith in the teaching of the Buddha, will shake off all wickedness, as does the wind the leaves of a tree.
25. The Bhixu who is kind, who has perfect faith in the teaching of the Buddha, is so near nirvâṇa that he cannot possibly fall away from it?
26. The Bhixu who has subdued what charms the heart, what is agreeable to the mind, what delights and what does not delight (i.e., passions), is full of delight, and will find the end of suffering.
27. His body at rest and dispassionate, his mind perfectly composed, having cast off all worldly affairs, the Bhixu is (then) in peace, I declare.
28 (372). Without meditation (samâdhi) there is no knowledge; without knowledge there is no meditation: he who possesses knowledge and meditation, he shall be called a Bhixu.
29. They who are wise devote themselves to meditation and knowledge; the first thing therefore for an intelligent Bhixu is to acquire these.
30. Learn contentment and to control the senses; consider well what is necessary to salvation: learn to be moderate in your food, live in a secluded spot, and seek peace of mind in spiritual insight (vipaçyana); this is the doctrine of the Buddha?
31 (378). He who has not sinned in either body, speech, or mind, his conduct is virtuous, his mind is chaste, he is a Bhixu.
32. He who meditates on the seven constituent parts of sambodhi; has the greatest of virtues, perfect composure, he is a Bhixu.
33. He who in this world has learned how to put an end to his suffering, who is pure and wise and without corruption (âsrava), he is called a Bhixu.
34. He who, though virtuous, or an ascetic, or one who has heard much, has not been able to put an end to sinfulness though he lives in solitude, if he becomes wearied of seeking to obtain samâdhi, and gives it up through want of confidence, he is not a Bhixu.
35. The elements of being (skandha), that are called the individual, are the afflictions of this world; perfect enlightenment (samyaksambodhi) is happiness; to it the elect must devote themselves.
36. According to the way one has thought, so shall he become in another (life); they will come back again to this world, they who love existence, who delight in existence, who long for worldly goods, who consider but existence (in their theories), who delight in existence itself.
----------
37. Their joy is but suffering, their happiness but trembling with fear; they who would free themselves of existence, devote themselves to a life of purity (brahmacharya).
38. Çramanas and Brâhmana all do teach that existence is deliverance from existence; they none of them know deliverance from existence, I declare. 39. Çramanas and Brâhmana all do teach that existence is deliverance from existence; they none of them know real emancipation from existence, I declare.
40. Suffering is the outcome of attachment to existence (upâdâna), and from suffering proceeds attachment: if all attachments are destroyed there will not be produced any more suffering.
41.To whatever form of existence one has attachment: it is impermanent, miserable, subject to change;" he who by perfect knowledge regards them all in this light, will cast off all fondness for existence, and will find delight in the destruction of existence.
42. Then the Bhixu who has left sorrow behind (nibbuta) is safe, (for) being without attachment to another (existence), he will put an end to existence; subduing Mâra, conquering in the fight, he will then be delivered from all existences: this is the end of suffering.
43. The Bhixu who has cut himself off from existence (bhava), who is dispassionate, whose mind is at peace, will not experience existence again, having fallen out of the orb of regeneration. 44. The Bhixu who has cut himself off from existence, who is dispassionate, whose mind is at peace, is freed from the bonds of Mâra, having fallen out of the orb of regeneration.
----------
45. The Bhixu who has cut himself off from existence, whose mind has become without sin (âsrava), will not experience existence again, having fallen out of the orb of regeneration. 46. The Bhixu who has cut himself off from existence, whose mind has become without sin, is freed from the bonds of Mâra, having fallen out of the orb of regeneration.
----------
----------
----------
47. The Bhixu who has cut himself off from existence, who has cut to pieces fondness for existence, will not experience existence again, and has fallen out of the orb of regeneration. 48. The Bhixu who has cut himself off from existence, who has cut off fondness for existence, is freed from the bonds of Mâra, having fallen out of the orb of regeneration.
----------
49. He who, having crossed the swamp (of desire), and being (no longer) pricked by the thorns of worldliness,2 has found the way to put an end to passions, he is (truly) called a Bhixu.
50. He who, having crossed the swamp, and being (no longer) pricked by the thorns of worldliness, has found the way to put an end to hatred, he is (truly) called a Bhixu.
----------
----------
----------
----------
55. He who has put an end to reviling, killing, hurting, and to the thorns of worldliness, who is as immovable as a mountain, whom pleasure does not disturb, he is a Bhixu.
56. The Bhixu who does not revile or exaggerate: who perceives that this world is like a mirage, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off its old worn-out skin.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
57. As the physician cures the poison of the snake, so the Bhixu who conquers rising passions casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off its old worn-out skin.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
64. The Bhixu who eradicates every particle of the passions as does the mighty river the weak embankment, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off its old worn-out skin.
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
70. The Bhixu who casts off all the qualities of desire, who frees himself from all the bonds of holding on to desire, cats off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off its old worn-out skin.
71. The Bhixu who, having cast off all mental obscurities, is without sin, whose mind is severed from the grief of misery, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off its old worn-out skin. 72. The Bhixu whose judgment is clear, who sees clearly into everything, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off its old worn-out skin.
73. The Bhixu who has eradicated the whole forest of sinfulness, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off its old worn-out skin.
74. The Bhixu who has eradicated all the plagues, &c., of sinfulness, casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off its old worn-out skin.
75. The Bhixu who has eradicated every sinful inclination: casts off what is and is not of the other shore, as a snake shuffles off its old worn-out skin.
76. The Bhixu who observes the law, who is in contemplation (dhyana) of the void (of all substances), who has continual peace of mind: who has left sorrow behind (nibbuta), is happy.
77. The Bhixu who, speaking neither pleasantly nor unpleasantly, takes up his abode in remote places, living in purity, entirely drives out love of existence and (sinful) inclinations.
Chapter on the Bhixu, the thirty-second.
XXXIII THE BRÂHMANA.
1. HE who, though having ornamental apparel, is righteous, controlled, quiet, restrained, leading a life of holiness 1 (brahmacharya), who neither harms or kills any living I thing, he is a Brâhmana, a Çramana, he is a Bhixu. 2 (141). It is not by nakedness, by long hair, by dirt, by fasting, or by sleeping on the bare ground, not by dust and dirt: or by devoting oneself to sitting motionless, that men become pure and leave their doubts behind.
----------
3. Whatever Çramanas and Brâhmanas there be who have passions, they will not put an end to sinfulness (the âsravas), and will experience the suffering of passing from life to life (transmigrating). I[( 56,1)] 4. Whatever Çramanas and Brâhmanas there be who have passions, they will not put an end to sensation (vedanâ), and will experience the suffering of passing from life to life.
5. Whatever Çramanas and Brâhmanas there be who have passions, and who have but a foolish object in view: they will experience the suffering of passing from life to life. 6. Whatever Çramanas and Brâhmanas there be who have passions,2 the foolish, stupid men mill experience the suffering of passing from life to life.
7. Whatever Çramanas and Brâhmanas there be who have passions, they will not find the blessed ideal (nirvâṇa), and will experience the suffering of passing from life to life.
8 (394). 0 fool! what is the use of thy long locks? what is the use of thy garment of skin? Within thee there abides darkness; the outside thou makest clean.
----------
9 (393). One does not become a Brâhmana by his family, by his long locks, by his lineage; he who possesses the law of truth and who is pure, he is a Brâhmana.
10. One does not become a Brâhmana by his family, by his long locks, by his lineage; he who casts away all sins both great and small, him, because he has cast away sin, I call a Brâhmana.
11. A man is not a Çramana on account of his shaven head, a man is not a Brâhmana because he says " Om! " He who knows what is virtue, and who is pure, he is a Brâhmana.
12. A man is not a Çramana on account of his shaven head; a man is not a Brâhmana because he says " Om! " He who casts away all sins both great and small, he, because he has cast away sins, is a Çramana, a Brâhmana.
13. One does not become pure by washing, as do the common of mortals in this world; he who casts away every sin both great and small, he, because he has cast away sins, is a Çramana, a Brâhmana.
14. He who has cast off all sinfulness, who devotes himself to continual reflection, who has the perfect enlightenment of the destruction of all attachment, he in the (three) worlds is a Brâhmana. I[( 88,1)]
15. The Brâhmana who has cast off all sinfulness, who is without hypocrisy, and who leads a pure life, has reached the perfection (set forth in) the Vedas; his life is a life of holiness (brahmacharya), and when he does speak, his speech is holy.
16. He who is not given to deceiving, who is without selfishness, who is without passions, without expectation, who has conquered hatred, who is on the way to nirvâṇa (the extinction of sorrow), he is a Brâhmana, a Çramana, he is a Bhixu.
17 (396). He who has been born of woman, if he has great possessions, he may be called "Bhovadi," but I call him not a Brâhmana; he who possesses nothing, who accepts nothing, him I call a Brâhmana.
18 (391). He who does nothing sinful in body, speech, and mind, who has the three parts well controlled, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
19. He who uses not harsh words, who speaks what is right (true) and pleasing, who is without sinfulness, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
20. He who patiently endures stripes,’ bonds, and abuse, in whose manner is patience, which gives the strength of a host: he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
21. He who is without anger, who observes the precepts, well-behaved, without desires, who has now a body for the last time, lie, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
22. He who no longer dwells among either the clergy or the laity, who has few desires, who frequents not houses, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
23. He for whom there are no pleasures in the future, who feels no pain on account of those he has left behind, who has thrown off the bond of voluptuousness, who has conquered in the fight (against Mâra), he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
24. Re for whom there are no pleasures in the future, who feels no pain on account of those he has left behind, who is immaculate, dispassionate, without sorrow, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
25. He who nourishes not the smallest desire, who is subdued, who is devoted to (acquiring) the chief thing (nirvâṇa), who has destroyed sinfulness (âsravas), who is cleansed from stains, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
26 (385). He for whom there is neither this side nor that side, who has reached the end of all conditions, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
27. He for whom there is neither this side or that side, who is without fondness for the three objects: he, I declare, is a Brâhmana. 28 (409). He who takes nothing in this world, whether it be short or long, thin or thick, good or bad, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
----------
29. He then who, having wisdom, puts an end to his suffering, being without passions, free from everything, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
30. He who has cast off both virtue and vice, who is divested of everything, who is without passion (râga), at peace, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
31. He who has left behind all fondness for virtue and vice, who has left fondness behind, who is perfectly emancipated, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
32. He for whom there is no behind, before, and between, who is without passion (râga), freed from bondage, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana?
33. He who, like water on the leaf of a lotus, like a mustard seed on the end of a reed: does not adhere to vice, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana. 34 (401). He who, like water on the leaf of a lotus, like a mustard seed on the end of a reed, does not adhere to pleasures, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana. 35. He who, like water on the leaf of a lotus, like a mustard seed on the end of a reed, has thrown off delight in existence, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana
----------
----------
36. He who, like the moon, is chaste, pure, undefiled, perfectly clear, who has stripped off sinfulness, he, I declare is a Brâhmana. 37 (413). He who, like the moon, is chaste, pure, undefiled, perfectly clear, 7 h oh as cast off all delight in existence, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
38. He who is stripped of sinfulness, as is the heaven of mire and the moon of dust, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana. 39. He who is stripped of desires, as is the heaven of mire and the moon of dust, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana. 40. He who has cast off all delight in existence, as does the heaven mire and the moon dust, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
41. He who dwells (in solitude), free from passion (râga), meditating, without sin (âsrava), having done what ought to be done: subdued, having his last body, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
42 (403). He whose knowledge is deep, whose mind is well directed, who knows the right and the wrong way, who has found the greatest blessing (the way to nirvâṇa), he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
43. The men, whoever they be, who live solely on alms, who have nothing that is their own, who do no harm, who are steadfast, who live a life of holiness (brahmatcharya), who, being perfectly wise (themselves), teach the law (the nidânas), they, I declare, are Brâhmana.
44 (415). He who casts off desires, who becomes homeless on entering the priesthood, who puts an end to the sin of desire, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
45. He who does not harm any living creature, who does not kill or take part in killing, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
----------
----------
----------
46. He who is tolerant with the intolerant, who patiently endures punishment, who is merciful to all creatures, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
47. As a mustard seed on the point of a reed (drops off), so he who keeps passions, hatred, and selfishness under control, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
48. He who passes beyond this stronghold of affections and the river of transmigration, who having crossed over (i.e., having found the way to nirvâna), has not both his mind and thoughts preoccupied about going to the other shore, who has left behind attachment (upâdâna), he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
----------
49 (410). He who has no desire for this world or for the other, who has put an end to all fondness for existence, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
50. He who is without love for this world or for the other, who is without love, who has completely cast it off, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
51. He who, casting off what is pleasant and unpleasant, has become cool (i.e., has found contentment), who is without sin, who has overcome the whole world, who is steadfast, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
52 (417). He who, having cast off human attachment? has left behind the attachment of the gods, he who is free from all attachment, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
53 (420). He whose way the Devas, Gandharvas, and men comprehend not, he whose passiveness mankind does not comprehend, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana. 54. He for whom there exists no law that is not known and understood, he who sees to the remotest parts of knowledge, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
55 (423). He who, knowing his former abodes (existences), perceives heaven (svarga) and hell, the Muni who has found the way to put an end to birth, who is perfected in knowledge, who knows the termination of suffering, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
56. He whose mind is perfectly emancipated, who is wise, who is delivered from all passions, who possesses the triple knowledge l (trividya), he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
57. He who understands the deaths, changes, and births of all sentient creatures, who has the all-penetrating eye (sammanta chakkhu), who is perfectly enlightened (Buddha), he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
58. He who has left all attachment behind, who is without affliction, without joy, who is reflective, and who teaches (others), he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
59. He who is a Muni, a conqueror (djina), the greatest of Rischis, the chief of chiefs: the greatest of bulls (usabham), who has nought to seek for, who has been washed clean, who is perfectly enlightened (Buddha), he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
60. He who has given up existence, who has conquered everything, who has crossed the stream, who is well away (from the world), who has cast off everything, and has reached the other shore, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
61. He who thinks not of what is sinful, who does not speak inconsiderately, who lives, his mind free from passion (râga), he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
62. He whose clothes come from piles of rubbish, who learns to be modest, who is without desires, who lives near a tree, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
63. He who, having cast away all suffering, is at rest, and who gives himself up to meditating on the holy eightfold way, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana. 64. He who has given up everything (worldly), who is enlightened, without doubt and misery, who perceives the perfect state free from death (akkhara?-i.e., nirvâṇa), he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
65. He who is without a body; who lives in a cave, who wanders about alone, who controls the fleeting mind which is hard to control, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
----------
66. He who comprehends the immaterial (arûpa) which cannot be seen, the infinite (ananta) which cannot possibly be seen, the subtile, the fundamental: who is always reflective, who has put an end to all attachment (yoga), who is perfectly enlightened (Buddha), he, in this world, is a Brâhmana.
----------
67. He who has destroyed the fastenings (?) and the cordst who by cutting the cords and the ropes has thrown off all affliction and is enlightened, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
68. He who has destroyed desires for (worldly goods, sinfulness, the bonds of the eye of the flesh, who has torn up desire by the very root, he, I declare, is a Brâhmana.
69. He who by earnestness has cut the stream, who has overcome all desires, who knows the end of the sanskâra, who is without sin, he is a Brâhmana.
70 (294). He who has killed father and mother and two pure (çuxi) kings, and who has conquered their kingdoms with the inhabitants, is without sin, is a Brâhmana.
71 (295). He who has killed father and mother and two pure kings, and who has killed an irresistible tiger (veyyaggha, i.e., cruelty), is without sin, is a Brâhmana.
72 (389). He who stupidly drives away a virtuous Brâhmana, is wicked; one should not strike Brâhmanas; one should not drive away Brâhmanas.
----------
73. He who perfectly understands the laws should be honoured and respected by both young and old, as the Brâhmana does the holy fire (aggihuttam).
74. He who perfectly understands the laws should be honoured and reverentially approached by both old and young, as does the Brâhmana the holy fire.
75 (392). He who perfectly understands the law taught by the perfect Buddha, should be honoured and respected, as the Brâhmana does the holy fire.
76. He who perfectly understands the law taught by the perfect Buddha should be honoured and reverentially approached, as does the Brâhmana the holy fire.
77. When the Brâhmana has reached the other shore of existence, then he stands alone, having left far behind (all fear) of Piçâtchas (and Râkchas like) Vakula?
78. When the Brâhmana has reached the other shore of existence (lit. of the law), then he sees, and all the perceptions (vedanâ) vanish from his sight.
----------
79. When the Brâhmana has reached the other shore of existence, then he sees, and all causes (hetu) vanish.
80. When the Brâhmana has reached the other shore of existence, then he sees, and all attachment (yoga) vanishes.
81. When the Brâhmana has reached the other shore of existence, then he leaves behind him birth, old age, and death.
82 (387, 1st part). The sun shines by day, the moon shines by night, the suit of armour of the king doth shine: the Brâhmana shines in his meditation. 83. The sun shines by day, the moon shines by night, continually, day and night, does the luminous (form of the) Buddha shine.
84. As Brâhmanas and the like have left behind everything that is disagreeable, as my mind has consequently left behind (all passions), I have truly put an end to all pettiness.
85. When the ardent, meditative Brâhmana has perfectly understood the (different) conditions (dharma) and their causes (the twelve nidânas), and when these ideas have become perfectly clear to him, then he casts away every particle of perplexity. 86. When the ardent, meditative Brâhmana has perfectly understood suffering and its cause, and when this idea (dharma) has become perfectly clear to him, then he casts away every particle of perplexity.
----------
87. When the ardent, meditative Brâhmana has discovered the destruction of sensation (vedanâ), and when this idea has become perfectly clear to him, then he casts away every particle of perplexity. 88. When the ardent, meditative Brâhmana has discovered the cessation of all causes (hetu), and (when) this idea has become perfectly clear to him, then he casts away every particle of perplexity?
----------
89. When the ardent, meditative Brâhmana has discovered the cessation of sinfulness (âsravas), and when this idea has become perfectly clear to him, then he casts away every particle of perplexity.
90. When to the ardent, meditative Brâhmana all these ideas have become perfectly clear, he stands lighting up all the worlds (or the whole world) as the sun illuminates the sky.
----------
91. When to the ardent, meditative Brâhmana, who by knowledge has become emancipated from all attachment (yoga), all these ideas have become perfectly clear, he stands, having dispelled the hosts of Mâra (like the sun that illuminates the sky?).
Chapter on the Brâhmana, the Thirty-third.
----------
The Udânavarga compiled by Dharmatrâta is finished. Translated (into Tibetan) by the Indian Pandit Vidyaprabhakara and the Lotsâva Bande-rin-tchen-mtchog; revised and arranged by the corrector, the Lotsâva Bande-dpal-brtsegs.